[Amit Varma]: Human beings are frail and limited and the world is complex. We try to make sense of
[Amit Varma]: this complicated world by telling ourselves stories about it, but these stories are always
[Amit Varma]: too simple and can never contain more than a fraction of the truth. You would imagine
[Amit Varma]: that this would lead us to be humble, to understand the limits of our own knowledge and our own
[Amit Varma]: power. And yet, in our species, ignorance seems to go hand in hand with arrogance. The
[Amit Varma]: less we know, the more we imagine we can control. The classic domain where this falls short
[Amit Varma]: is the domain of economics. An economy, like a society or like language, cannot be designed
[Amit Varma]: or controlled from the top down. It's an example of spontaneous order or what Adam
[Amit Varma]: Ferguson described as, quote, the result of human action, not human design, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: In other words, it's formed from the bottom up, not the top down, much like natural selection
[Amit Varma]: in the universe, as I discussed in an old episode with Matt Ridley that I'll link from
[Amit Varma]: the show notes. Now, a classic example of this hubris, which hurts because we in India
[Amit Varma]: have suffered from it, is central planning. When we gained independence in 1947, our founders
[Amit Varma]: decided that the best way to run our economy was from the top down. This was the fashion
[Amit Varma]: of the times. Yes, Frederick Hayek published his great essay, The Use of Knowledge in Society
[Amit Varma]: in 1945, which explained how a central planner could never have all the information needed
[Amit Varma]: to design the economy, and only the price system could do this efficiently from the
[Amit Varma]: bottom up. It's a masterpiece, I'll link it from the show notes, do read it. But Hayek
[Amit Varma]: was an outlier at the time, as were Indian dissenters like B. R. Shenoy. People then
[Amit Varma]: thought planning was the way forward. They assumed that the Soviet model was working
[Amit Varma]: for the Soviets. We now know it was a big failure. And so we set up the planning commission,
[Amit Varma]: private enterprise was suppressed, and we crawled forward as an economy while others
[Amit Varma]: left us far behind. Millions of people remained in poverty for decades longer than they would
[Amit Varma]: have if private enterprise had been unleashed, like, say, in South Korea. The lesson here
[Amit Varma]: is not in specific things that the planning commission did. The top down mindset itself
[Amit Varma]: was wrong. Many years later, Hayek would coin the term the fatal conceit for this. And yes,
[Amit Varma]: it was conceit, and it was fatal. We eventually changed course, unleashed the power of free
[Amit Varma]: enterprise in 1991, and brought hundreds of millions of people out of poverty. But those
[Amit Varma]: in power today still commit the mistake of thinking about the economy and society in
[Amit Varma]: a top down way, as do so many of our intellectuals. And we need to look at the mistakes of the
[Amit Varma]: past, the disaster of our planning commissions, not to assign blame, or to attack this individual
[Amit Varma]: or that individual, but to learn from those mistakes, to learn humility, to learn that
[Amit Varma]: society and economies cannot be designed from the top down. Let us not land in that hell
[Unknown]: again.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest today is a historian Nikhil Menon, who's just
[Amit Varma]: written a superb book called Planning Democracy. This is a history of our planning commission,
[Amit Varma]: but it's also a story about fascinating human beings who were remarkable people, did great
[Amit Varma]: things, but did not understand the limits of their abilities, went down some wrong paths,
[Amit Varma]: made big mistakes. We see the brilliant PC Mahalon Abyss, a man almost trapped by his
[Amit Varma]: own brilliance. He can solve small problems. So he makes a mistake of believing he can
[Amit Varma]: solve big ones. He does this nation a favor by building a remarkable statistical ecosystem.
[Amit Varma]: But he also harms it by imagining that data can be used to order the world. We see Jawaharlal
[Amit Varma]: Nehru, a great leader with his own set of fatal flaws, and his kind of cute bromance
[Amit Varma]: with Mahalon Abyss. We see the petty politics and intrigue within the planning commission.
[Amit Varma]: We see how Bollywood starts thinking about five year plans. We see the Congress Party
[Amit Varma]: cultivate a group of sadhus who are asked to promote planning in this world so they
[Amit Varma]: can have peace in the next. There's some crazy shit going on. I enjoy chatting with Nikhil
[Amit Varma]: about his book and about his life. So the first two and a half hours is really an oral
[Amit Varma]: history of this fine young scholar. And we actually get to the book after that. I loved
[Amit Varma]: all of this conversation. But before we get down to it, let's take a quick commercial
[Amit Varma]: break.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it? Well, I'd love
[Amit Varma]: to help you. Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course, The Art of
[Amit Varma]: Clear Writing. An online community has now sprung up of all my past students. We have
[Amit Varma]: workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students and vibrant community interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing. There are many exercises, much interaction,
[Amit Varma]: a lovely and lively community at the end of it. The course costs rupees 10,000 plus GST
[Amit Varma]: or about $150 and is a monthly thing. So if you're interested, head on over to register
[Amit Varma]: at indiancut.com slash clear writing. That's indiancut.com slash clear writing. Being a
[Amit Varma]: good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard and a clear
[Amit Varma]: idea of what you need to do to refine your skills. I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Nikhil, welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks so much. Thank you so much for having me.
[Amit Varma]: I had a great time reading your book. But let's let's begin by kind of talking about
[Amit Varma]: yourself. Where were you born? Where did you grow up? Tell me about your early years.
[Guest]: I was born in Madras. It was then Madras, not Chennai. And I spent the first few years
[Guest]: of my life there. I have very little memories of that time because we soon moved because
[Guest]: my father's job to Bombay as it was then as well before Mumbai. Actually first to for
[Guest]: a short period to Jabalpur in Madhya Pradesh, then to Pune, which is where my younger sister
[Guest]: was born and then to to Bombay. But my first real memories are of Pune and then of Bombay.
[Guest]: People love the city based on the memories of a six and seven year old. So it's more
[Guest]: the affection or nostalgia rather than any learned sort of experience of the subject.
[Guest]: But I mean, it's it's the Bombay for me is the Bombay of Kiss Me Bars, which is something
[Guest]: that you used to get when you were and I was young. This is still very early liberalization
[Guest]: of Bhelpuri, of Chowpatty Beach, but also the sort of more ugly side of the riots of
[Guest]: 1991-92. I was only six. So I can't, you know, I don't have very clear memories. But I do
[Guest]: remember the sort of, I suppose, children absorb the sense of fear that's around them.
[Guest]: And I remember when my father was out of town, because he had a sort of sales job that that
[Guest]: took him traveling for long periods in the month. The women and children would be locked
[Guest]: inside the house and the men folk would go upstairs. If there's any sort of band of rioters
[Guest]: that came by, they would throw stones down on them. And so I remember that fear of my
[Guest]: mother and me, and my very sort of toddler sister being locked inside the house. That
[Guest]: is a sort of memory I have. But yeah, so those are my sort of early years in in Mumbai. And
[Guest]: then after which we all moved back to Madras, which is was home for both my parents as well.
[Guest]: And so I had the luxury of now having both sets of grandparents around. And I think in
[Guest]: some ways, my love for book, toddler sister being locked inside the house, that is a sort
[Amit Varma]: of memory I have where.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a bit about your grandparents and the love for books, like what were they like,
[Amit Varma]: what kind of books did you have lying around? How did you kind of gradually get into the
[Guest]: world of reading as it were?
[Guest]: Yeah, I'd say that one set of my grandparents, my mother's parents weren't necessarily bookish
[Guest]: in that I don't remember in their house, seeing too many books around or them reading many
[Guest]: books on a day to day basis. And that might be because my grandmother, who was the more
[Guest]: bookish of the two of the couple, she died when I was very young. And so I didn't get
[Guest]: to interact with her. But I do know of stories from family members about her love for learning.
[Guest]: She because of her life circumstances could not study perhaps as much as she wanted to.
[Guest]: But you know, her daughters certainly have, and her children have. But it was the my other
[Guest]: set of my paternal grandparents, my grandfather worked, was a journalist, and he worked for
[Guest]: now defunct newspaper called the Madras Mail. And this was he worked for it before independence
[Guest]: and after as well. And he was the sort of person that you would always find with a book,
[Guest]: he would go anywhere. When he would take me for haircuts, he would carry a book along
[Guest]: when he was going on an auto rickshaw ride, he would carry a book. It was almost a sort
[Guest]: of source of comfort, a crutch almost. But the books that he had around were the sort
[Guest]: of books that I imbibed. And I think that after a point he would, he was enormously
[Guest]: fond of me and I of him. But I suppose after a point, you don't want to be just telling
[Guest]: you know, children's stories. So he would just read out to me whatever he was reading.
[Guest]: And so these were then be the unabridged Sherlock Holmes, all the entire series of the Sherlock
[Guest]: Holmes stories. Then sometimes he would read the Ramayana, the Mahabharata and explain
[Guest]: those stories to me that of course would be abridged many times over to make it intelligible
[Guest]: to me. And so I remember that being associating books in some ways with him and his smell.
[Guest]: He used to use snuff. And so I remember associating books with that smell and with him and with
[Guest]: his dog, who he saved from death at a dog pound by, the story goes by, while on there
[Guest]: to do a story on dog pounds, he saw this one dog puppy and who was so tiny that he couldn't
[Guest]: bear the thought of it being killed. And so he literally put it in his shirt pocket and
[Guest]: walked out. And so that dog, Sumi, would also be, apart from me, the other listener to these
[Guest]: stories. And so I think I associate, in some ways, perhaps I associate reading books with
[Guest]: those moments of being perfectly enraptured by my grandfather reading a story, those smells
[Guest]: being in my grandparents' house and having a dog by the side.
[Amit Varma]: Wow, that's such a charming memory. And when you read those stories now, do you hear his
[Amit Varma]: voice?
[Guest]: I do hear his voice. I hear his voice also when I often think of him, he also died when
[Guest]: I was young, but I often think of him, hear his voice when I am, I'm not a religious person,
[Guest]: but my parents are. And when we go to a temple, or there's like a sort of puja, or there's
[Guest]: something now, it used to be done for my benefit now, for my very young daughter's benefit,
[Guest]: I remember the prayers that he taught me, because those are the only prayers I know,
[Guest]: just the, you know, the very standard Shri Ram Jayam, Om Namah Shivaya. And after the
[Guest]: Ganpati prayer, sort of knocking my forehead, that's something that he used to do. So I
[Guest]: associate those things with him. And I also, yes, I do see his books at my aunt's place.
[Guest]: I made sure to have one copy of his books now sit with me on my, in my bedroom, along
[Guest]: with some other books in the US. And so it is nice to know that those very same books
[Guest]: that he used to read out to me from, I have to confess that I haven't gone back to reading
[Guest]: all of Arthur Conan Doyle's oeuvre, but it is, I suppose, I was, I appreciate those stories
[Guest]: more for the memories that they spark rather than, you know, the stories themselves, which
[Guest]: are wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: So in your book, you, you know, described C.D. Deshmukh Chintaman Deshmukh as a rooted
[Amit Varma]: cosmopolitan, which is a fascinating phrase. And the first time I heard it, it was used
[Amit Varma]: by one of my earlier guests, Sugata Srinivas Raju, you know, describing himself. And I
[Amit Varma]: thought to myself that, you know, I am cosmopolitan, but I don't feel quite so rooted. But I admire
[Amit Varma]: those who are, it's something that I envy, because I think there is something in that,
[Amit Varma]: like in Deshmukh's case, you wrote, quote, he was a rooted cosmopolitan, combining Anglicized
[Amit Varma]: sophistication with Brahmanical learning, and so on, you go on to elaborate on that.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that your grandfather then also was a little bit like that, in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that he's reading out these Arthur Conan Doyle stories. And at the same time, he's taught
[Amit Varma]: you prayers and shlokas and all of that. So tell me a little bit about sort of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: was that rooted cosmopolitanism, as it were these different worlds coexisting harmoniously?
[Amit Varma]: Was that a part of your growing up? And did it shape you in any way? Would you say that
[Amit Varma]: that's what you are as well? Or do you feel you're more, you know, one or the other?
[Guest]: I certainly would not describe myself as that. I don't think I'm nearly quite as
[Guest]: rooted in terms of my intellectual traditions. I would like to think I'm cosmopolitan. The
[Guest]: fact that I at least have family across different places means that in some definitional way
[Guest]: I am, I would like to think that I aspire to intellectual cosmopolitanism as well. And
[Guest]: so it is an aspiration. And I think that, yes, C.D. Deshmukh certainly was. And though
[Guest]: I hadn't thought about it, my grandfather certainly fits the bill as well. Somebody
[Guest]: who is very comfortable, was very comfortable speaking in three languages, could read and
[Guest]: write in three languages, Tamil, Malayalam and English, of course, which was the mode
[Guest]: in which he did his job as a journalist. But also someone who, as you say, apart from just
[Guest]: linguistic ability, which I lack. I mean, I don't have the ability in quite the same
[Guest]: way as him to reflexively think in different languages. I don't think in different languages.
[Guest]: I can read, can read and speak Hindi, but and I can understand Malayalam and Tamil,
[Guest]: but I don't, you know, I'm not comfortable writing in those languages as my grandfather
[Guest]: certainly was. And certainly, you know, I would not put even, you know, my grandfather
[Guest]: at the level of someone like C.D. Deshmukh, who really was, you know, was a translator
[Guest]: of Sanskrit texts into Marathi and into English as well. And so he really was a root cosmopolitan,
[Guest]: but also from the face of it, he would just look extremely anglicized. This is a quite
[Guest]: dapper looking man who was trained in Bombay and then topped the ICS exams and then was
[Guest]: trained at Cambridge as well. And so he would seem like the kind of person who you would
[Guest]: think of as deracinated, but actually was very rooted. And I have an admiration for
[Guest]: that. Not to fetishize being rooted, but it's just that the way I was brought up, unfortunately,
[Guest]: was at a time in which the emphasis on English was so much that I think that my parents felt
[Guest]: that that was the most important thing. And I understand those choices, absolutely. But
[Guest]: I do wish, for example, that I had greater facility in my mother tongue, Malayalam, right,
[Guest]: which as the years go by without any grandparent alive anymore, I can see the sort of inevitable
[Guest]: almost erosion of those of that entire world. Luckily, I speak, my parents live in Tamil
[Guest]: Nadu and in Chennai. And so there's a sort of cognate language that I'm familiar with.
[Guest]: But it is in a sense that I can see that in a decade or two, I wonder how many people
[Guest]: I would ever be able to speak in Malayalam too. I could hold a conversation with my grandparents,
[Guest]: which now I think would increasingly be hard. And that is a loss that I feel and a loss
[Guest]: in some ways that is greater than the fact that I don't live physically in India, because
[Guest]: my works on India I visit often enough. But I think that I do have a great admiration
[Guest]: for linguistic capabilities, because I think that there are, I wonder often if there are
[Guest]: things that are non translatable and cultural textures that come from only inhabiting certain
[Guest]: linguistic frames. And I wonder if the fact that I maybe can claim to possess that only
[Guest]: in one language, what does that lead to, even though, you know, in Hindi, I'm quite comfortable,
[Guest]: I can read, right, I follow Hindi popular culture. But I still wonder, especially outside
[Guest]: of those two languages. I wish I do yearn for, I wish I was one of those people who
[Guest]: could speak six languages from different continents. That is something that I admire.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I often think about how those of us who are in India, are so lucky to be here,
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that one, there is no shortage of experiences and stories and textures all
[Amit Varma]: around you. And two, there are so many languages and all of these languages are windows into
[Amit Varma]: different kinds of worlds and experiences, right. And most Indians in some way or the
[Amit Varma]: other are multilingual. One thing I've noted is that most of the guests on the show and
[Amit Varma]: it's a limitation, are English speaking elites like myself. And for many of us, we've been
[Amit Varma]: brought up in this sort of English speaking elite bubble, where we have a view from within
[Amit Varma]: the bubble. And you know, a lot of a lot of the mistaken notions about India that I had
[Amit Varma]: that we are broadly liberal, that we are broadly tolerant, that we are broadly secular, were
[Amit Varma]: I later realized with time falls. But the few of my guests who actually grew up speaking
[Amit Varma]: a number of guests like Subhash Rai, Rahul Verma, they've, you know, they grew up reading
[Amit Varma]: Hindi newspapers exposed to that world. And from there, I often get another perspective
[Amit Varma]: that is actually closed off to English speaking elites like myself. Like I remember, I've
[Amit Varma]: done a couple of episodes with Akar Patel. And in the first of them, my thesis, which
[Amit Varma]: he agreed with, is that there is no such thing as a right wing intellectual culture in India.
[Amit Varma]: It's really, it's all intellectual tradition, rather, it's really all bigotry. And you can
[Amit Varma]: locate in the language of conservatism, but there's nothing there. And I later realized
[Amit Varma]: speaking to other guests that I was wrong. And the reason I felt that way, was because
[Amit Varma]: all my reading was in English, and I was going by what I had read there. But if you read
[Amit Varma]: much more in the languages, you realize that there was a vibrant right wing intellectual
[Amit Varma]: tradition, and I might not agree with it, some of it might even repulse me. And some
[Amit Varma]: of it, you know, one can learn from, but it's coherent, it's there. And we were blind to
[Amit Varma]: all of it as much as we were blind to sort of our country in that sense. And, and I wonder
[Amit Varma]: if and which is why I was sort of interested in your, you know, your grandfather being
[Amit Varma]: that kind of a person who was immersed in both cultures, because I think the point of
[Amit Varma]: being a rooted cosmopolitan is not so much, you know, achieving excellence in different
[Amit Varma]: languages like Mr. Deshmukh did, or even being able to read and write in multiple languages,
[Amit Varma]: but simply being exposed to that being exposed to those currents, even if you're not particularly,
[Amit Varma]: you know, well versed in a language or whatever. And I looked through the acknowledgements
[Amit Varma]: of your book, for example, and the people you've named, and some of them have been on
[Amit Varma]: my show, and so many of them I've read and heard of, but it seems like a small group,
[Amit Varma]: it seems like again, a small elite group of people, very similar backgrounds, so on and
[Amit Varma]: so forth. So just, you know, being in these circles, what is your sense of this? Do you
[Amit Varma]: feel that the scholars within this ecosystem for no individual fault of theirs, can nevertheless
[Amit Varma]: have blindnesses about the country, things that are unseen to them, given that it's a
[Amit Varma]: close group of people with similar backgrounds, and so on and so forth?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think that there is, in some ways, it is inescapable. I think in whatever, in
[Guest]: whatever part of the income distribution that you are born and raised in, or whatever intellectual
[Guest]: traditions that you just happen is your milieu, I think that you are likely to be corseted
[Guest]: by it to be shaped by it. And so I think that what's important is to acknowledge its limitations.
[Guest]: But I don't think, I think that there's a danger sometimes in it, in sort of self-flagellation,
[Guest]: in sort of rejecting what you have, because it is limited. I would, I would contend that
[Guest]: anybody has those limitations. The question is whether you're open to sort of opening
[Guest]: some windows in that bubble, such that there are streams of other thought that can come
[Guest]: in, that you are willing to open the door and step out sometimes, as well. And so, and
[Guest]: I think that even amongst English speaking elites or elites of any kind, there can be,
[Guest]: so for example, in American politics, which I'm assuming at least Indian listeners are
[Guest]: much less passionate about, and so maybe we can think about it in less, without retreating
[Guest]: into tribal corners. In American politics, you have two parties that are ideologically
[Guest]: very different, but both represent elites, right? And so it isn't as if there isn't group
[Guest]: think, that there is only group think within a certain liberal elite. I think there can
[Guest]: be group think in all kinds of elites. And so, and I also don't think that in the case
[Guest]: of India, it is necessarily the case that the English speaking elite always was fooled
[Guest]: into thinking that it represented the nation. So for example, Gandhi certainly did not think
[Guest]: so. Nehru, who is seen as the epitome of this kind of liberal elite, Anglicized elite, all
[Guest]: of Discovery of India is about how alien he feels, right? About how he realizes that this
[Guest]: is not the country. And in some ways, I think that the work of the early generation, the
[Guest]: first generation of the post-colonial India across political parties, all of them concede
[Guest]: that the nation needs to be tutored into their ideas, especially if you are on the liberal
[Guest]: end of the spectrum. In the writings of Nehru, certainly, like every public speech is basically
[Guest]: a concession that the public does not believe in these things. Ambedkar, for example, cried
[Guest]: himself hoarse talking about how, you know, he said, as he said, one of his perhaps his
[Guest]: last speech at the Constituent Assembly, that this is only a topsoil of democracy that we
[Guest]: have on an otherwise extremely undemocratic land. And I think what he was conceding is
[Guest]: that people like him, people who had the views and influences of Locke and Dewey, and the
[Guest]: sort of the liberal canon, that that is not shared by, in fact, he felt it's not even
[Guest]: shared by the English speaking elite, right, by much of the Congress as well. And so I
[Guest]: think that there is an admission that this is not shared by others. And in some ways,
[Guest]: I think that what allowed that generation to be cognizant of it, is the fact that it
[Guest]: was so infinitesimally narrow, right, that you could not but recognize that there were
[Guest]: only so few people who shared it. Whereas I think with India's growth, and with education
[Guest]: growing and with English speaking becoming more accessible, even though it still is preserved
[Guest]: the elite, but the elite itself has expanded, right, just in terms of magnitude and a percentage
[Guest]: of the population. I think that now it's easier to fool yourself into thinking that it actually
[Guest]: represents a fair amount of India, whereas it doesn't. And so I think it's ironic that
[Guest]: at a time in which India was less, had a narrower elite, that that elite was more aware of the
[Guest]: limitations of that milieu than perhaps later on.
[Amit Varma]: I was at a conference recently where people were, you know, make having grand conversations
[Amit Varma]: about how we can change India and so on and so forth. And one of the academics present
[Amit Varma]: there used a phrase that didn't quite resonate with me in the sense that she said that we
[Amit Varma]: need to educate the people. And I absolutely hated that phrase, because it just seems so
[Amit Varma]: paternalistic and patronizing that we need to educate the people like we know everything
[Amit Varma]: they know nothing. And you just spoke about how Nehru quote unquote, he realized that
[Amit Varma]: people need to be tutored in his beliefs. And I think that approach that elites have
[Amit Varma]: often had is one reason why I think they are justifiably derided today, that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you pass judgment on the rest of the people, you say, we know best, we are going to teach
[Amit Varma]: you, we are going to show you how to live your lives, you know, even the notion of the
[Amit Varma]: constitution that why is it so sprawling, you know, Madhav's theory, of course, is that
[Amit Varma]: it's also a pedagogic document that you need to teach the people how to think and how to
[Amit Varma]: live and all of that. And I think there is, you know, a paternalistic strain to that,
[Amit Varma]: that is bound to not end well, as we sort of, as we sort of see today. And what I see
[Amit Varma]: today is that we had a liberal constitution imposed on an illiberal society, a relatively
[Amit Varma]: liberal constitution, not as liberal as I think either of us would perhaps like but
[Amit Varma]: relatively liberal imposed on an illiberal society. And, and politics has caught up with
[Amit Varma]: society today. And this was perhaps inevitable, given this sort of top down thinking that
[Amit Varma]: we shall tutor them. And in fact, your book is about a particular manifestation of that
[Amit Varma]: kind of top down thinking, which is really fascinating. So when you sort of look at all
[Amit Varma]: these characters, and you've written so much about not just Nehru, but also Mahalon Abyss
[Amit Varma]: in your book, and one of the things I really enjoyed about your book is how parts of them
[Amit Varma]: are such acute character studies of these interesting people with, you know, their fatal
[Amit Varma]: conceits as it were, and all the flaws that they had. And do you feel that this was a
[Amit Varma]: fatal flaw, you know, that maybe Gandhi took it too far when he idealised villages, which
[Amit Varma]: as Ambedkar correctly said, were, you know, dens of localism and vice and prejudice and
[Amit Varma]: all of that. But Gandhi did have a point where he said that you need to change society from
[Amit Varma]: the bottom up. You can't sit in your little livery tower and say, we will tutor the people,
[Guest]: we will educate the people.
[Guest]: I mean, firstly, I should say that I've never been to a conference where the title was how
[Guest]: to change India. So I know this wasn't the title. Okay, but there was a subject being
[Amit Varma]: discussed. You know, the pompous people will get together and say yeh karna chahiye, wo
[Guest]: karna chahiye, you know, that kind of thing. Right. I'd say that paternalism, I'd agree
[Guest]: with your characterisation of what you say is in Madhav Khosla's book that the Constitution
[Guest]: is a pedagogic document. I'd say that, in some ways, the Nehruvian era is marked by
[Guest]: that kind of pedagogic instinct. It's apparent in his speeches and in his writings that,
[Guest]: and that reflected a view amongst the Congress at the time that if you needed to have a liberal
[Guest]: democracy with all of its limitations, that in a country that is actually deeply illiberal,
[Guest]: that there was no way around it. And so I'd suppose the way that I would respond to you
[Guest]: or I mean, I'd be curious to know what you think is how, what was the other model available
[Guest]: unless your model of governance is that you will only reflect the people. But for example,
[Guest]: that is certainly not what the chief architect of the Constitution, Ambedkar thought. I mean,
[Guest]: he thought that it would be terrible if the Constitution reflected the people because
[Guest]: he thought it was as he referred to, you know, villages as sort of dens of localism, ignorance
[Guest]: and vice. And I think that that view is held by others as well, which is that India is
[Guest]: a country that is seen as benighted, is seen as living, is quite explicitly referred to
[Guest]: as living in the intellectual dark ages. And that, especially with things such as caste,
[Guest]: with untouchability, with the horrors that all of these people had personally witnessed
[Guest]: while in the constituent assembly, right outside their doors, the violence of partition of
[Guest]: thousands of people gathered at Humayun's tomb, at other places in Delhi, at riots breaking
[Guest]: out in the middle of the night while they're having these discussions. So I think it's
[Guest]: to them, it's a, it was a very visceral sense that, that India needed to move out of those
[Guest]: kinds of attachments. And, and does that lead to paternalism? Yes. But I wonder if an Indian
[Guest]: democratic experiment that was not going to take say 200 years like the American one did,
[Guest]: if there is a way out of that, because it seems to me that, I mean, even if you want
[Guest]: to have an illiberal, I mean, perhaps if you want an illiberal democracy, then you wouldn't
[Guest]: have to be so paternalistic, because in the view of many people at the time, India was
[Guest]: illiberal on these counts. Even Gandhi believed that perhaps he wouldn't have used the language
[Guest]: of liberalism. But he certainly disagreed fundamentally with the way in which India
[Guest]: treated women, and we can debate whether Gandhi himself was, was above board on these matters.
[Guest]: He certainly disagreed with the treatment of untouchables, the Harijans, as he started
[Guest]: to call them, after his long decades long sort of transition in his views on those.
[Guest]: And so, whether it is from a liberal like Ambedkar, or Nehru, or it is somebody who
[Guest]: is within the, who's considered sort of conservative amongst liberals like Patel, or somebody like
[Guest]: Gandhi, who, I suppose, escapes easy political classification, there is a certain distaste
[Guest]: towards India, India's, India's social evils, right. And I think that those today across
[Guest]: the right and left, we'd all agree are, are issues, right, sex discrimination, and all
[Guest]: these things. And so how does one, how does one institute a democracy that does not just
[Guest]: reflect those things without it being paternalistic, I think, is a question. And I'd be curious
[Guest]: to think what you, how you think that they might have escaped that bind?
[Amit Varma]: I know, that's a great question. And I recognize that it's easy to criticize them in hindsight.
[Amit Varma]: I think if I was there in the moment, you know, it was perfectly natural for them to
[Amit Varma]: think the way they did. Ambedkar, of course, was right about society then and what he said
[Amit Varma]: then holds true today. So that is a dilemma when Ambedkar talks about how the Constitution
[Amit Varma]: is just a topsoil on democracy and all of that, you know, it is such a profound lament.
[Amit Varma]: I think he himself knew in this that moment that there are no easy answers. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: given what the world thought at that time about what a state should be, what is relation
[Amit Varma]: to society should be, given our experiences with colonialism, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: It's perfectly understandable for us to have gone down on all those directions, then I
[Amit Varma]: buy that. However, what we need to do today, I think, and enough people don't do with enough
[Amit Varma]: seriousness is look back at that time and recognize in clear terms, the mistakes that
[Amit Varma]: were made because we do have the benefit of hindsight. What we see in modern times is
[Amit Varma]: like I often say that Narendra Modi, no matter how much he may rail against Nehru and Indira
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, is really their true successor in different ways. He thinks in a top down
[Amit Varma]: way just like Nehru did. He has the authoritarian instincts of Indira Gandhi. He has perhaps
[Amit Varma]: even the callousness and psychopathy of a Sanjay Gandhi, right? So it's almost as if
[Amit Varma]: we sort of learned nothing from the past. We had this glorious golden moment between
[Amit Varma]: 1991 and 2011, which lifted, you know, hundreds of millions of people out of poverty. And
[Amit Varma]: I have a number of episodes on that period, which I'll link from the show notes and why
[Amit Varma]: it ended. But have we internalized those lessons? For example, in your book, you point out about
[Amit Varma]: how the Planning Commission may have gone, but one in, you know, and this is not what
[Amit Varma]: you said in your book, but my sense is that Modi took the same mindset into everything
[Amit Varma]: he does. And what you do point out in his book is that Rahul Gandhi actually promised
[Amit Varma]: to bring back some kind of Planning Commission. He said it would be a good idea that Mamata
[Amit Varma]: Banerjee said that there should be a Planning Commission for Bengal. So my big worry is
[Amit Varma]: that all this time has passed, and we haven't learned, you know, I was chatting with Pratap
[Amit Varma]: Bhanumata the other day, and he uses great phrase about a certain way that some young
[Amit Varma]: people today think, which is tech solutionism, right? And another phrase we can use for the
[Amit Varma]: same thing from an earlier time is the engineering mindset. And we know that that's a folly,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Hayek called it the fatal conceit. We've seen what it has done to India. So when
[Amit Varma]: I hark back on those times, and think about the decisions these people made, look, all
[Amit Varma]: of these were great people, people like we, you know, we would be such a better place
[Amit Varma]: today if we had a Nehru today, by which we mean an intellectual with that kind of inquiring
[Amit Varma]: mind, and so on and so forth in politics, and we don't. But it's important to look back
[Amit Varma]: at the time and see what are the mistakes we made, which is why I kind of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: talk about it and bring it up.
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely. And in fact, tech solutionism reminds me of a phrase that I use associated
[Guest]: with Mahalanobis, which is a sort of techno utopianism, yeah, this belief that if you
[Guest]: had enough data, that if you had the computer to crunch the data, that it would it would
[Guest]: lead to sort of optimal solutions in a planned economy. And this, of course, as you know,
[Guest]: goes back to the sort of great debate in the early 20th century between free market economists
[Guest]: like Mises and Hayek, and a sort of planning economist from socialist country, Oscar Langer
[Guest]: about called the great socialist calculation of the economic calculation debate, which
[Guest]: is essentially a debate about, can an economy be planned, essentially, if you have enough
[Guest]: data, and the free market has argued that, well, there can never be enough data. And
[Guest]: that you can, even if you had enough data that you would not have the sort of crunching
[Guest]: capacity to know what to do with it. And people like sort of Mahalanobis and Lange, etc. Basically,
[Guest]: once the computer is invented, they say, Aha, well, now we have it. So it should be possible,
[Guest]: right. So I think that there is an inflated belief in the possibilities of technological
[Guest]: solutions. But I think that that that that level of optimism, in some ways, comes with
[Guest]: the territory of new nation formation. And I don't say this to again, go back to your
[Guest]: point. Yes, I think that we necessarily need to, as citizens, criticize decisions that
[Guest]: were made, you know, in the early years of the republic, but also in the recent past.
[Guest]: But as a historian, my job is to try to understand them and explain them, right. But understanding
[Guest]: is not necessarily a way of justifying them. It's just to understand it. And to understand
[Guest]: why, for example, planning was so popular, right? Today, it seems alien, this idea that
[Guest]: centralized planning would be popular amongst young people going to college or popular amongst
[Guest]: all the economists popular even amongst international economists recommending things to India. But
[Guest]: I think that with this book, and with whatever historians do our job is to try to recreate
[Guest]: that context. And I think that in recreating that context, I think that I realized how
[Guest]: much technology mattered to this early generation, because it felt to this generation that technology
[Guest]: was the way to for India to leapfrog decades, if not centuries of backwardness. And so that
[Guest]: India would not have to go through 200-300 years of democracy like Britain or advanced
[Guest]: nations in Western Europe or America did in order to have similar economies. And which
[Guest]: is why you see this thrust towards the IITs, this kind of celebration of the technocrat,
[Guest]: like not just Mahalanobis, of course, but Homi Bhabha. Why does Homi Bhabha have such
[Guest]: a central role in the public's imagination? Why does Vikram Sarabhai have such a central
[Guest]: role? And it's because of these, what is seen as the emancipatory possibility of this technology,
[Guest]: right, that we went from being Ghulam to now having a space program to have a nuclear program
[Guest]: that in itself was seen as an achievement. And I think that that comes with an inflated
[Guest]: sense of what these technologies can do, and perhaps leads to a maybe unforgivable ignorance
[Guest]: about the necessity of much more mundane things like primary education, primary health, things
[Guest]: that, despite India and China in 1950, having almost identical per capita incomes, even
[Guest]: by 1980, even before Deng Xiaoping and the changes wrought by that, China was already ahead
[Guest]: of India, not in terms of per capita income so much, but its investment in its labor force was
[Guest]: such that it had a labor force and a citizenry that had education that was much healthier,
[Guest]: and was not dealing in quite the same way that India was with undernourishment, etc.,
[Guest]: which allowed it once it did liberalize its economy, or at least make it, maybe liberalize
[Guest]: is a more complicated word with the CCP, but at least made it more export facing, allowed it to
[Guest]: tap into that potential in ways that India perhaps overlooked. And I think that that is,
[Guest]: in my mind, one of the signal failures of that era, of the early decades of independence,
[Guest]: in that there is such a focus, admirable in many ways, on building institutions,
[Guest]: world class institutions of higher education, but not enough to what is happening at the other end,
[Guest]: at getting Indians just a basic education, getting them basic, you know, two meals a day,
[Guest]: forget three meals a day, getting enough protein in their diet, all things that I'm sure you've
[Guest]: discussed in your other episodes with economists and policy experts. But and I think that that
[Guest]: might have been a failing that accrued from the narrowness of this class, and believing that
[Guest]: this class needed to provide all the solutions. And so, well, this class, we do have, by 1947,
[Guest]: you know, a class of people who have cleared the ICS, who have been foreign educated, who have,
[Guest]: like Nehru was, like Mahalanobis was, like Homi Bhabha was, like Vikram Sarabhai also was,
[Guest]: all of them, Oxford educated, actually Cambridge educated, right. And so, there's a valorization
[Guest]: of this class and of the abilities of this class to provide solutions to the country.
[Guest]: And perhaps it wasn't, it didn't look more broadly at what at improving the average,
[Guest]: as opposed to making India's topmost class, world class.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, absolutely. And you know, one of the things, one of the ways in which I think your book really
[Amit Varma]: works as a book of history is that you haven't taken, you're not coming at it from any prism,
[Amit Varma]: you're just trying to understand the events of history through the actions of people and the
[Amit Varma]: context in which they operated. So, it really works like if I was 20 years old in 55, right,
[Amit Varma]: then like Jagdish Bhagwati and Manmohan Singh at the time, I might also have fallen for the
[Amit Varma]: Mahalanobis point of view, right. It's later on that Bhagwati and Manmohan and all of that
[Amit Varma]: went in different directions. But at that time, what do you do? You are a new country,
[Amit Varma]: as you said, your default mode has to be optimism, because you don't have a choice.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, that would have seemed so seductive as far as, you know,
[Amit Varma]: socialistic calculation argument goes. A couple of things, one that I, of course, agree with,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the Austrians and the free market economists on that, that you will never have
[Amit Varma]: enough data. That's point one, because, you know, Borges has a story about how a good map of the
[Amit Varma]: world is as big as the world itself, right? And it's really a similar problem, except that a good
[Amit Varma]: map of the world, which is as big as the world itself, is immediately in the next instance,
[Amit Varma]: a bad map of the world because the world has changed. So it's an insurmountable problem.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this led me to conceiving of a thought experiment, which I posed to one of the
[Amit Varma]: libertarian guests on my show, I think it was David Bowes. Was it Tyler Cowen or David Bowes?
[Amit Varma]: I think it was David Bowes. And the thought experiment was this, and it was sort of an
[Amit Varma]: anti libertarian thought experiment. And it was this that what if you have tools, which allows you
[Amit Varma]: to, you know, tap into every neuron of every brain of every human being in the world,
[Amit Varma]: and know exactly what they think and feel right now, and also what they will think and feel in
[Amit Varma]: the in the future. So would that justify central planning, if you can satisfy all their wants and
[Amit Varma]: needs, and they're perfectly happy, and everything is taken care of in a thought experiment where you
[Amit Varma]: have sort of the actual tech utopianism of a Mahalon Abyss, you have all the data, you have
[Amit Varma]: all the computers, you know, would that then justify central planning? And if I remember
[Amit Varma]: correctly, David's answer, and this would be my answer as well, is that it would not, even then
[Amit Varma]: it would not because autonomy matters, you have to respect individual autonomy and individual agency,
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, right. So just that fundamental way about the state directing the action of
[Amit Varma]: millions of people, even if you could do it to everyone's satisfaction, it still doesn't work
[Amit Varma]: for me. And I think that this was, you know, a fundamental dilemma and an understandable dilemma
[Amit Varma]: at the start of the republic. Because because of the scale of the task, the how do we build this
[Amit Varma]: nation? How do we even bring it together? You are forced to think in terms of collectives and think
[Amit Varma]: of in terms of group identities and not individual identities, you know, thinking of individual
[Amit Varma]: rights at that moment is perhaps a luxury. I had a great episode on VP Menon with Narayani Basu,
[Amit Varma]: and VP Menon, of course, helped pertain in his project of, you know, creating these lines on
[Amit Varma]: the map that we see today, the nation as we are. And I feel at one level, an immense disquiet about
[Amit Varma]: that, because it seems to me like an act of fast track colonization, what the British took two,
[Amit Varma]: three centuries to do, we are doing in a few months with a combination of persuasion and
[Amit Varma]: coercion and promises that are later broken. And how moral is that? Now, the other hand, I,
[Amit Varma]: I love this country as it is, it kind of worked out, okay, but that would again be, you know,
[Amit Varma]: justifying the means because of the end. But also I get it, I get it that when you're in in that
[Amit Varma]: moment where everything is falling apart, where it seems as if the center will not hold, I
[Amit Varma]: understand that centralizing impulse and to think of things like individual rights in that moment,
[Amit Varma]: no matter if you did pay lip service to them in the constitution, but they're not protected
[Amit Varma]: adequately. I sort of get that. So, you know, in that sense, I'm not going to fault our founders
[Amit Varma]: on anything that happened between, you know, between independence and say till the mid 60s,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I really get angry the mid 60s onwards, Indira Gandhi onwards, because
[Amit Varma]: I think, you know, deliberate acts of wildness were carried out. I mean, a lot of Indira Gandhi's
[Amit Varma]: policies economic and otherwise were crimes on humanity. But until then, these were great men
[Amit Varma]: dealing with difficult and intractable problems. And thank God we don't, you know, that phase is
[Amit Varma]: over. But we have more knowledge now and we can look back and sort of and even what you've done
[Amit Varma]: in your book, you know, giving your readers the understanding of why these people such as they were
[Amit Varma]: with all their complexities acted in the ways that they did, I think is profoundly useful,
[Amit Varma]: is profoundly useful, because it goes past ideological dogmatism that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: centrists may feel today or rather status may feel today. And it gives that context that okay,
[Amit Varma]: these are the decisions they make, like, what do you do, right? What would you do in that place?
[Amit Varma]: You know, but, but yeah, I mean, broadly, I think I spent a long time agreeing with you just now.
[Guest]: No, I mean, thank you so much. I'm very glad to hear that you found that aspect useful.
[Guest]: What you said about Borges, it sort of struck me as well about this, this thirst for data and
[Guest]: this belief, almost unfalsifiable belief that enough data will lead to a sort of omniscience,
[Guest]: and therefore lead to very good outcomes. And the irony about going back to the Borges story about
[Guest]: trying to come up with a map for the world that is if it's it has to be detailed enough, then just
[Guest]: becomes a replication of the world. It's almost an irony that the person who seemingly has a view
[Guest]: like that, P.C. Mahalanobis, is also the world's leading expert on sample serving, whose logic is
[Guest]: the absolute opposite, which is that you should not do enumeration of every single item, but
[Guest]: instead take a representative sample. And from that blow up to what, what it might represent,
[Guest]: right. So that seems an ironic twist to the person who believes in this sort of centralized planning
[Guest]: comes up with a is one of the leaders in a very different kind of thought experiment,
[Guest]: one that becomes so successful that is now that, as Angus Deaton, the Nobel Prize winner in
[Guest]: economics said, where Mahalanobis and India led the rest of the world has followed such that
[Guest]: India's National Sample Survey has been has been used as inspiration for lots of the household
[Guest]: surveys that are done by the World Bank and the United Nations today in more than 100 countries.
[Guest]: So, so I found that that that contrast where you were talking very interesting. I also found it
[Guest]: interesting because the thing about computers is that today we know that they cannot solve
[Guest]: all of the world's problems. In fact, perhaps we might even blame them for a good deal of them.
[Guest]: But again, as a historian, it took me by surprise how liberatory it was seen as being when it was
[Guest]: first invented, when the first computers come, whether the Colossus in Britain, which is used
[Guest]: for code breaking during the Second World War, or the ENIAC at the University of Pennsylvania's
[Guest]: campus in Philadelphia. When Mahalanobis, we know from his, his diaries that I read while
[Guest]: researching for this book, he has this diary in which he's traveling from Philadelphia to Princeton
[Guest]: meeting John von Neumann, reading Albert Einstein, meeting these people, meeting Howard Aiken at
[Guest]: Harvard. And he's talking about about the computer, and he talks about it as solving all kinds of
[Guest]: problems that we now know today that even the best supercomputer can't do. But at the time, again,
[Guest]: it's this, the newness, the newness of it, and the absolute mind boggling leap in human
[Guest]: computational abilities with the first computers, the first computers, which, by the way, might have
[Guest]: had some of the computing power that we might now carry around in our pockets, right? Much less than
[Amit Varma]: that. You would not be able to load Twitter on one of those. Exactly, yes. But it was seen as, and
[Guest]: in fact, was referred to in the American popular press as electronic brain, right? So it was seen
[Guest]: as just being this, like a new kind of organism that could produce new kinds of results. And, but
[Guest]: I think that that related to this, this confidence in, in, in quantitative capacity leading to optimal
[Guest]: outcomes, is the fact that centralization of the economy or the state had got a good reputation
[Guest]: amongst anti-colonial nationalists across the world from the late 19th century onwards. And
[Guest]: the reason for that is that, for better or for worse, capitalism comes to be associated with
[Guest]: with colonialism, right? As the arch-colonial power in the world through the 19th and the 20th
[Guest]: centuries, Britain is seen as, well, they had the Industrial Revolution. They are the primary
[Guest]: capitalist nation in the world and the primary colonial nation in the world. And so you see this
[Guest]: rhetoric being used by socialists and even non-socialist anti-colonialists across the world
[Guest]: in Africa, Asia, about capitalism being a form of colonialism. And so I think that once it is
[Guest]: tarnished with that, it becomes very hard for, for anti-nationalists to think of themselves as
[Guest]: capitalists in that manner, which is why when you look at the, at the constituent assembly debates
[Guest]: or parliamentary debates in the early 1950s, everyone refers to themselves as socialist.
[Guest]: The Janssen refers to itself as socialist. The Congress refers to itself as socialist.
[Guest]: The Congress, of course, say that socialist is too light, but everybody refers to themselves
[Guest]: as a socialist. And I think it's because of the legacy of colonialism and its association
[Guest]: with capitalism. And then in the late 19th century, you have this epical event, which
[Guest]: at least to Indians at the time, which is the Meiji Restoration in 1868, in which you see this,
[Guest]: what is seen as this kind of sleepy Asian nation that wouldn't allow other countries to come visit
[Guest]: or enter it, suddenly very rapidly modernizing and technologically advancing. In the early,
[Guest]: in the late 1920s, with the first five-year plan in the Soviet Union, again, you have
[Guest]: this nation that you just see as like India, primarily an agrarian, in the language of the
[Guest]: time, a feudal nation, suddenly making rapid technological advances. In the 1930s, it starts
[Guest]: becoming clear that, well, you can have centralization even without adopting a communist
[Guest]: system, because, well, hey, America under FDR has, you know, what people today might call forms of
[Guest]: planning, right, the public, the levels of public investment, the role of the state. And then by the
[Guest]: 1940s, the very government that is colonizing you, in 1945, Winston Churchill is thrown out of power,
[Guest]: Clement Attlee, government comes into power, and the Labour Manifesto, the Labour Party Manifesto,
[Guest]: refers to the Labour Party in England believing in a planned state. So now you have this as even
[Guest]: at the very center of colonialism, them believing that the state should have a very central role.
[Guest]: And the Second World War, of course, plays a very important aspect in this, because whichever side
[Guest]: you are on, allied or axis, the state is playing the role of governing the economy. And I think
[Guest]: that that gives a lot of belief to people in India, that which is why by the 1940s, Indian
[Guest]: industrialists are calling for planning, Gandhians, not Gandhi himself, but Gandhians are calling for
[Guest]: planning, the Muslim League has its own plan, the Congress Party has many of its own plans as well.
[Guest]: And so it becomes, in some ways, a part of the language of nationalism. And I think that is what
[Guest]: in the early part of the book, at least, especially in the introduction, I try to recreate why is it
[Guest]: that JRD Tata is sitting in on National Planning Committee meetings in the 1940s? Why is it that
[Guest]: people on the board of Tata and Sons, or GD Birla or Lala Sriram are all on these planning committees?
[Guest]: And I think it's that it's in some ways, this sort of lost economic world in which
[Guest]: the role of the state is just seen as non negotiable, in a way that today, of course, it's
[Amit Varma]: not. Yeah, and we will come to it when we talk about the book. But I think in some ways, it is
[Amit Varma]: also out of self interest, because all of these businessmen you named want to protect their own
[Amit Varma]: turf, right? So they're like, okay, the state must do everything and don't let foreign companies in,
[Amit Varma]: you know, protect our markets and all of that. So that is really a crony capitalist impulse.
[Amit Varma]: It's not a free market impulse. But, you know, and there's a lovely quote in your book about
[Amit Varma]: socialism, which I'll kind of read out like when, you know, early on when they talk about the
[Amit Varma]: necessity of planning to achieve the socialistic dream, as it were, and you write, quote,
[Amit Varma]: the choice of socialistic was a convenient obfuscation that allowed vague agreement within
[Amit Varma]: the party without tying it to specific commitments, seemingly far flung points on the on the
[Amit Varma]: contemporary political spectrum saw themselves as socialist or socialist adjacent. The term
[Amit Varma]: socialist was a large umbrella that accommodated many under it. Indian socialists thought was a
[Amit Varma]: shapeshifting ideology that threaded together members of the Congress Party, those of the
[Amit Varma]: opposition Praja Socialist Party of Jayaprakash Narayan, Ram Manohar Lohia and Kamaladevi Chattopadhyay
[Amit Varma]: and even Gandhians like J.C. Kumarappa and Vinoba Bhave. Even the Hindu nationalist Jansang
[Amit Varma]: occasionally claimed some version of socialism as a goal. The result, as Sudipto Kaviraj put it,
[Amit Varma]: was a beveledering variety of socialism from communist to Hindu, stop quote. And it's interesting
[Amit Varma]: how that word seemed to cease to mean anything. I mean, even when the BJP was formed in 1980,
[Amit Varma]: you know, they said, okay, we'll be are about Gandhi and socialism till of course, Rajiv Gandhi
[Amit Varma]: took the Hindu vote in 84. And then they were like, no, no, we got to fight for that. I'll go
[Amit Varma]: back to Mahalanobis and, you know, the joy which you bring out in his book of his excitement about
[Amit Varma]: computers. And I sometimes think that that's actually understandable and damn good. Because
[Amit Varma]: I think what happens to all of us is that we become too jaded. You know, there is this old
[Amit Varma]: quote about how a sufficiently advanced technology can seem like magic, right is indistinguishable
[Amit Varma]: from magic. I think Arthur C. Clarke said it. And you can imagine the sense of awe and wonder when
[Amit Varma]: you see a computer working for the very first time, right? Or I remember the sort of astonishment
[Amit Varma]: when I saw GPS work for the very first time you hear about it and you're like, shit, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you can see a map and you know where you are on it and you've been given directions. We just take
[Amit Varma]: it for granted. You know, one of my friends said that no one in this current generation is going
[Amit Varma]: to know what it is to be lost again. Like that's so fundamental. And in that sense, I think we've
[Amit Varma]: lost something. And one can sort of understand the excitement of the people of that generation
[Amit Varma]: and how they get carried away. Like anytime new technology comes about, you know, we'll all
[Amit Varma]: overestimate the short term and underestimate the long term, right? You think it's going to be
[Amit Varma]: dramatic, it's going to change the world. I call he did robots are going to take over, right? So I
[Amit Varma]: kind of get that Mahalanobis excitement. It's something that I think we should all kind of
[Amit Varma]: cultivate without getting carried away into a utopianism, as he did. But we'll talk about the
[Amit Varma]: book in a lot of detail. But I realized that I took our listeners away from the narrative of
[Amit Varma]: your own life. We had just about kind of stopped at your grandparents. So tell me a little bit more
[Amit Varma]: about what kind of books were you then reading? Like what kind of kid were you? What kind of
[Amit Varma]: things interested you as a child? And tell me a little bit more about that journey.
[Guest]: Yes, to return to my narrative, which is much less exciting. But as a child, I was interested
[Guest]: in the things that I think many young children are, especially boys, I was I loved sports. I
[Guest]: loved watching sports and playing sports. Playing sports was a big part of my growing up playing,
[Guest]: you know, on downstairs in the colony with the other kids riding cycles, playing cricket.
[Guest]: Playing cricket with tennis ball or whatever rubber ball or whatever, we could find never a
[Guest]: real cricket ball because that required too much investment and threatened too much bodily injury,
[Guest]: which our techniques could not really handle, especially on the concrete surfaces that we
[Guest]: played on. But yes, I love cricket, I regret we do not manage to watch nearly as much now as I as I
[Guest]: did, I really enjoyed playing football. And so I used to play cricket at school, I went for you
[Guest]: cricket classes, I played football almost every day at school, played later on in high school,
[Guest]: played badminton as well. And I remember cricket actually, in my, in my years in middle school and
[Guest]: high school, taking up a sort of disproportionate amount of mental space. The fortunes, the Indian
[Guest]: cricket team, and Sachin in particular, kind of indexed my mood through days and months. And I
[Guest]: think that is that is, I mean, I think that that is a very common case amongst people, perhaps,
[Guest]: especially gendered, perhaps, especially young boys of my generation. And I think that now there's
[Guest]: lots of interesting work that when I teach in the US to my students about the 90s and the early
[Guest]: 2000s, when I teach liberalization and the changes it makes in Indian popular culture, I try to
[Guest]: convey, perhaps unsuccessfully, how Sachin and cricket sort of transforms the lives and the
[Guest]: popular culture and the kind of hoardings that you see around, around the city. So books were
[Guest]: also a part of it. I would like to say that books were as important as sports. But they frankly
[Guest]: weren't. But it was another aspect of my life. I enjoyed, I enjoyed reading, I would get sometimes
[Guest]: obsessed with certain books. I remember reading Le Miserable, the whole thing, I don't remember
[Guest]: particularly enjoying it, but it almost became a sort of challenge that I need to on my way to
[Guest]: school and on my way back. And while I'm waiting, you know, for my sister to finish her dance
[Guest]: classes or her music classes, you know, this is in Madras, where learning Carnatic music and
[Guest]: Bharatanatyam are all sort of almost rites of passage that unfortunately, or fortunately,
[Guest]: young girls go through. I myself went for some Carnatic classes as a very young child. And
[Guest]: I think that the lack of talent was very, very quickly spotted. And so but I remember reading
[Guest]: books like that, that I, you know, big books that one felt that you had to read in order to
[Guest]: to be intelligent, but also books that I just enjoyed reading, you know, in early middle school,
[Guest]: your sort of body boys, but then after that, some books that that were recommended to me, or I saw,
[Guest]: you know, recommended in, I'm assuming in the pages, the Hindu, which is the also a staple in
[Guest]: in Madras households. But I remember reading Gabriel Garcia Marquez. And that I remember,
[Guest]: not just feeling like this is part of what my literary diet should be, but actually enjoying it,
[Guest]: enjoying finding it difficult, but enjoying 100 years of solitude, especially perhaps,
[Guest]: you know, because one is a young teenager, especially Love in the Time of Cholera,
[Guest]: though Love in the Time of Cholera is about extremely old people in love, but still
[Guest]: finding that quite moving. So those are those are the books that come to mind. Who else?
[Guest]: Marquez certainly, I remember trying to picking up Rushdie's Midnight's Children a couple of times
[Guest]: and not making it past the first 50 pages, being arrested by the opening scene of this
[Guest]: young Salim Sinai knocking his nose against the prayer mat, and a ruby red drop of blood falling
[Guest]: on it. But just finding it too difficult, and all the sort of verbal acrobatics, very impressive,
[Guest]: but hard to follow. And so I read, I read quite widely, I read mostly fiction, a lot more fiction,
[Guest]: and at a rate that I have never since matched. Regrettably, I wish I read, I'm trying now to
[Guest]: start reading a lot more fiction again. But it was mostly books on fiction that I would find
[Guest]: at my school library. My school was a big influence on me. I went to a school that is part
[Guest]: of the Krishnamurti Foundation. It has the name that elicits always interesting response, it was
[Guest]: just called the school. And it's a school at which I joined when I was in third grade. And I was there
[Guest]: till I finished my schooling. My sister was there since her kindergarten, and my mother taught and
[Guest]: teaches at that school. I found the experience of being in that school very different from in a way
[Guest]: that I could notice. It was appreciably different from the schooling and pedagogical experiences
[Guest]: that I had before then I was in a in a much more mainstream school in Pune and Mumbai before that
[Guest]: Bombay, where I remember having to ratta marufai, you know, just memorize by rote multiplication
[Guest]: tables. And if you got them wrong, you'd have to sort of stick out your knuckles and you'd get
[Guest]: wrapped on the knuckles with a wooden, with a wooden ruler. I remember, I don't even remember
[Guest]: if I ever got that on my knuckles. But I remember that being a real fear that that would happen. And
[Guest]: it was also part of the sort of social humiliation of the fact that you have to go to the front of
[Guest]: the class, and then you just extend your hands. And this teacher would, would do this. And so I
[Guest]: went to school, which not just didn't have any corporal punishment, but also had a much less
[Guest]: hierarchical interaction between teachers and students. We call the teachers akkas and annas,
[Guest]: which means elder sister and elder brother, which is not to say that there was no hierarchy,
[Guest]: of course there was, but that it didn't feel punitive in quite the same way. And it I think
[Guest]: it allowed me to feel much more comfortable. School began to feel, I was never one throughout
[Guest]: school. I know there are some, many who end up in academia who just loved going to school every day
[Guest]: because they just loved learning. That was not my experience. I would much rather have been at home
[Guest]: every day playing cricket, playing football. But school was not something I feared necessarily
[Guest]: because of the people at school. And I enjoyed my time there. I made, I enjoyed the very small
[Guest]: class sizes that we had. I remember in the 11th and 12th, I did history and was just two of us
[Guest]: with my teacher for two years studying history, which is perhaps a sort of sad sign for history.
[Guest]: But, but it was, it was good in that at least we, we got to have wide ranging discussions.
[Guest]: Did the other kid become a historian as well?
[Guest]: No, he did not. No, he did not. Perhaps for his, to his eternal benefit, perhaps.
[Guest]: He is quite happy in what he does. But I think that it also fostered, just like my interactions
[Guest]: with my grandparents and my extended family and my own parents, a sense that, that books can
[Guest]: be something more than just what oppresses you in the classroom, that they can be an escape.
[Guest]: And they can be an escape, not just when they're in fiction, but even in nonfiction,
[Guest]: and that there is something, yes, I might not, and I did not love classes in biology and chemistry,
[Guest]: but that, that I felt that there was, that my school inculcated an appreciation
[Guest]: for learning for its own sake. And that my job was in a sense to find what it was
[Guest]: for me, not necessarily to become an academic, but find what is it for me that might give me
[Guest]: a sense of that excitement and that, about certain subjects. And so I really valued that. I found
[Guest]: that, and I find this whole, the board exams and the stress that goes into it toxic. I was very
[Guest]: much part of that in that I was not able to shirk it. I could not play it cool. It just was
[Guest]: miserable for me to go through. And I felt that I, and I was very glad that, that those experiences
[Guest]: of the 10th and 12th did not overshadow a different relationship that I had built with learning and
[Guest]: the world of ideas, which I think is important, regardless of whether you want to go into
[Guest]: academia or not. I think that it's just, I think that is a good thing. I mean, I know from my
[Guest]: sister, for example, who also has this, who's not an academic at all, works for a media company,
[Guest]: but I think that this was something that I shared. I know from friends of mine who are also not in
[Guest]: academia, but went through this school or similar schools, that they have this association
[Guest]: with the liberal arts, with learning and with reading. And I, as years have passed on, I've
[Guest]: come to appreciate that even more and more. And so, since you were asking about what my influences
[Guest]: were at the time, I'd say that apart from specific books or authors, it was actually more this
[Guest]: context, this milieu of going to a campus that was just so beautiful. It was referred to by,
[Guest]: you know, sometimes by bus conductors and auto drivers as the kardu, which in Tamil means the
[Guest]: forest, because it, you know, it was really this lush campus on the Theosophical Society campus,
[Guest]: used to be in Adyar in Chennai, had this beautiful sprawling banyan tree at its sort of center. And
[Guest]: it was a school where you, you know, it might seem excessively hippie to some, but, you know,
[Guest]: we didn't have uniforms. For many years in school, I just didn't wear footwear. We didn't have exams
[Guest]: till the eighth grade, all of which I understand, you know, many of your listeners might be parents
[Guest]: and might balk at these ideas. But for me, it was, I think, a wonderful experience to have that.
[Guest]: And there was an emphasis on environmentalism, which was, you know, not common at all at that
[Guest]: time amongst schools, certainly in Chennai. There was an emphasis on relating what you studied to
[Guest]: social issues. And I think that that is something that has stayed with me. We went on trips every
[Guest]: year to a school farm. And this is not some kind of ennobliten farm, it was an actual functioning
[Guest]: farm where they grew legumes and rice, etc. And we partook of farming activities, not in any coddled
[Guest]: way. It's not like we were working like farmers, certainly not. We were not working from dawn to
[Guest]: the middle of the day. But we would spend, you know, a couple of hours working the farm, we would
[Guest]: cook our own food, we would do the things that life there would entail. And I think that it gave
[Guest]: me again, it's not like privileged city bred students can suddenly get a sense of what life is
[Guest]: for others. But it certainly opens a window. And we would do that every year from starting with two
[Guest]: or three nights to by the 11th and 12th grade spending three weeks there. We would go on trips
[Guest]: to study aspects of social concern. One that sticks, I have a sort of searing memory of
[Guest]: is one in the 11th grade when we toured different districts in Tamil Nadu, studying caste and
[Guest]: the presence still of untouchability, seeing things like the after effects of the two tumbler system,
[Guest]: seeing things like people in the village coming and telling us, well, you're all upper caste,
[Guest]: why are you going and staying in that part of the village? Why are you eating there?
[Guest]: Meeting a woman who, I remember this so clearly, who only had a stump of an arm,
[Guest]: and it was because she refused to sleep with an upper caste man, her village and her arm was
[Guest]: thrown, was cut off and thrown into the fire in front of her, and meeting her and her daughter.
[Guest]: And so realizing that, I mean, perhaps it was also maybe too much, maybe it was too much for
[Guest]: somebody so young to be exposed to something like that. But I think on the whole, it was an experience
[Guest]: that really did shape me, that it gives you a visceral sense of these are worlds and these
[Guest]: are privileges that I have not thought about. Engaging with uncomfortable conversations with
[Guest]: people in my own cohort, my classmates, close friends of mine, a close friend of mine who,
[Guest]: it turned out that he said that I cannot go and stay the night or eat in that house because my
[Guest]: parents who are Brahmin would just disown me. That is just not something, and these are not
[Guest]: conversations, obviously, that you have on a day-to-day basis, and you don't have it because
[Guest]: you are in such a bubble, right? You are in a bubble where even though admission is not caste
[Guest]: based, because it tends to be from a certain background, as you know very well, as listeners
[Guest]: know, income tends to index with caste as well. And so you just end up being in these upper caste
[Guest]: circles as I am even today, very much so. But having to confront this sort of thing really made
[Guest]: me think about, you know, I had to think about, well, what is my caste? How have I not been
[Guest]: thinking about this so far? How is it that it shapes the way in which I live my life? Why is it
[Guest]: that when, so for example, if we have a domestic help at home, why is it that she almost never
[Guest]: sort of sits on the chairs, you know, like when she's taking a rest, why does she sort of sit on
[Guest]: the floor? Again, it's not like we tell her you should sit, and even when I'd offer, please sit
[Guest]: on the chair, she wouldn't. But that's obviously not just a personal preference of sitting on the
[Guest]: floor. It's to do with years, maybe decades, maybe centuries of a system, not maybe centuries,
[Guest]: certainly centuries, millennia perhaps, of a system that has ground people into believing
[Guest]: certain things or believing that shaking these boundaries might have bad consequences. And so
[Guest]: in these ways, I found that this experience of school when I was very young was very helpful.
[Guest]: And then when I went to college in Delhi, it was even more mind expanding. Sorry, this is a
[Amit Varma]: long winded explanation. No, it's lovely. And there's lots to think about. One of my friends
[Amit Varma]: who works in a very senior position in a big company had this lament to me once, he said that
[Amit Varma]: whenever I go out for lunch or dinner with my fellow CXO people, I will find that I have nothing
[Amit Varma]: to talk about with them, because they don't read books, they don't watch movies, you know, they
[Amit Varma]: don't know the world outside their bubble, as it were, they don't seem to have an interior life,
[Amit Varma]: right? Or at least they don't seem to have a rich interior life. And that gets me to thinking but,
[Amit Varma]: you know, there's a danger in thinking that some people don't have the facility for that
[Amit Varma]: interior life. I think that is very patronizing and very wrong. I think what is a more likely
[Amit Varma]: explanation is that how you grow up impacts all of this. So you know, people like us who've been
[Amit Varma]: privileged enough to grow up surrounded by books in a relatively well off families exposed to so
[Amit Varma]: much, we, you know, we can develop that we can read a lot of books, we can watch movies, we have
[Amit Varma]: access to all of these things. Most people don't. Now, just in the context of education, you speak
[Amit Varma]: about how your school gave all of you both the exposure by taking you to all these villages by
[Amit Varma]: showing you a world outside the bubble. So you get that exposure, and also enabling you to read
[Amit Varma]: stuff to discover joy in books that goes beyond Oh, I need to study this for my exam, right, which
[Amit Varma]: I think is beautiful. And as you pointed out, it's it's like, it's not just you, even others who
[Amit Varma]: haven't gone in an academic direction, still feel that books played an important role in their lives.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just wondering whether what we think of as education itself is an artifact, whether it's
[Amit Varma]: deeply broken, you know, our concept of education, our education system really comes from the early
[Amit Varma]: 19th century, where you figured out a system to produce people to be workers in the Industrial
[Amit Varma]: Revolution to be factory workers, and so on and so forth. It is so regimented in terms of kids
[Amit Varma]: of the same age study together, there'll be the same bunch of subjects civil study, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there are templates for everything, you know, key geography, or geography, yes, syllabus,
[Amit Varma]: and beyond a certain point, is that really learning? Is that really education? So for people
[Amit Varma]: who don't have the kind of privileges we do to be able to go beyond this, you are, I feel severely
[Amit Varma]: hobbled by that. Right? So what are sort of your thoughts on it? I mean, a you were lucky enough to
[Amit Varma]: go to a school that allowed you to get beyond this. And I guess people go to normal schools,
[Amit Varma]: and obviously, they get past all of it. And now you've escaped into, you know, a different world
[Amit Varma]: of higher education, which also I'll ask you about. But what I'm just thinking aloud here
[Amit Varma]: from your experiences, you know, what are sort of your thoughts on that? Do we need to rethink all
[Amit Varma]: of this? Like, typically, when we talk about education, we'll talk in terms of not enough
[Amit Varma]: people are being able to go to school, which is a problem. Yes, we'll talk about outcomes in
[Amit Varma]: education, but those outcomes in education will be framed within the system as it is now, which
[Amit Varma]: I would argue is ossified and outdated and all of that, and so on and so forth. But I'd argue that
[Amit Varma]: we need to fundamentally rethink it, just the whole structure of that. So what are your thoughts?
[Guest]: I don't know if I have any well formulated policy recommendations.
[Guest]: I do know from that this is something that I think about as well in my personal life,
[Guest]: because I am now a teacher myself. And especially during the pandemic, there were all these
[Guest]: discussions, you know, at my university and everyone, every university really, about, you
[Guest]: know, do we move to online, but those are some logistical discussions. But behind those logistical
[Guest]: discussions are questions about what teaching itself is, what is education, what are we all here
[Guest]: doing? Is it just content delivery? Or is there something else that we're trying to do? And I
[Guest]: think that the stakes become even higher when you go the younger your students are, right? So I only
[Guest]: teach college students and above. And so I think that the stakes are much lower than that of, say,
[Guest]: my mother's, who has through her life being a primary school teacher, and instead of being
[Guest]: an admirable teacher in a way that I can never possibly be. But at that point, is what you're
[Guest]: doing really just delivering content, in which case, there are so many ways in which you can
[Guest]: get the content, that you don't have to rely on a flawed human being to deliver, you know,
[Guest]: bits of information that you can get from unflawed sort of technologies that can at least in terms
[Guest]: of the facts can sort of provide it if, again, if you vet your sources, etc. And so I think that
[Guest]: again, if you vet your sources, etc. But I think that what I found in my school, and again, I can
[Guest]: only speak from my experience, which is why I speak about my school. And like you said, people
[Guest]: have go to all kinds of schools and arrive at very similar positions to do what I do. So I don't know
[Guest]: how much you can say it's correlation or causation. But since I have a experiment of one, I cannot
[Guest]: sort of judge otherwise. For example, just in the in the subject that I studied, spent so many years
[Guest]: studying and that I am a member of today as a historian history, I have so many people when I
[Guest]: speak to them when when they ask me what I do, and I say that I'm a teacher or that I'm a historian,
[Guest]: they say, Oh, we hated history in school, but now they're interested in it. And I think that that
[Guest]: has to do with the way in which history is taught. And this is, you know, a common complaint,
[Guest]: but the way in which history is taught is the worst aspects of history, this, the belief that
[Guest]: you to memorize dates, and figures and lists of, you know, like this almost buzzfeed listicles of
[Guest]: like, four most important reasons the Second World War happened, right? Or three reasons why
[Guest]: Mughal Emperor Akbar was successful while so and so was not. And I think that that robs history
[Guest]: of of its texture of its scale of its explanatory power of its just human interest stories. And I
[Guest]: think that that can be extended in different ways to different subjects. Now, when it comes to the
[Guest]: policy, however, I feel a much much more I don't feel quite as confident talking about what can be
[Guest]: done to change the way in which education is done. In general, I might have some thoughts about how
[Guest]: history might be taught, but in other subjects, because I find myself pulled in different
[Guest]: directions between thinking, should we just burn this to the ground and come up with a better
[Guest]: system? Or given that we're not even at educating every child in an adequate way, and that even the
[Guest]: people that are on the books as educated or literate studies have shown by economists who
[Guest]: specialize in education that that their level of literacy is not what say an eighth standard
[Guest]: students should have. And at that point, then I wonder, like, are these again, are these quite
[Guest]: literally first world problems? Like, should we be actually trying to just, whatever our definition
[Guest]: of education and literacy is, should we be first attempting to have every child in India educated,
[Guest]: say, to the 10th standard or the 12th standard, have that as a goal first, and have them, you
[Guest]: know, get midday meal schemes, get them, you know, properly nourished, etc. And then look at I mean,
[Guest]: I wonder if, for example, if otherwise, we risk making the same kinds of mistakes that you made
[Guest]: in the Nehruvin era, where you try to think of, well, you need IAMs, we need IITs, but you forget
[Guest]: the very basics and the nuts and bolts. And so, so that's why I'm a bit conflicted about, about
[Guest]: wondering whether pedagogical methods and standards should change, or whether doing that might be
[Amit Varma]: putting the cart in front of the horse. No, I think I didn't even ask you about what your policy
[Amit Varma]: recommendations would be, because that is a Nehruvian way of thinking, you know, one hopes
[Amit Varma]: that disruptors emerge from within society, whether they use the mechanism of markets or not.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, and I totally agree with you that it's, it's a big problem where so many people just
[Amit Varma]: don't go to school at all. But is it a first world problem? No, I'd argue it is very much our problem,
[Amit Varma]: because the very fact that we have 10s of 1000s of unemployed PhDs that when there is an opening
[Amit Varma]: for say, a railway clerk job, you know, there'll be 20 openings and 50,000 people will apply and
[Amit Varma]: there'll be 3000 PhDs and all of that. What is then clear is that those degrees have become
[Amit Varma]: meaningless, that education doesn't have any value, because it's not giving you skills that are
[Amit Varma]: useful in any corner of the modern world. Right. So there is a supply demand mismatch then that
[Amit Varma]: on one hand, we have a jobs crisis. And we began, you know, a huge number of people who have
[Amit Varma]: education, but they haven't learned anything, you know, and that's just a reason to fundamentally
[Amit Varma]: rethink it, but not from the point of view of the state, I think, whatever solution comes will not
[Amit Varma]: come from the state. And however, things change, I just wish that the respective state in respective
[Amit Varma]: places are wise enough to kind of enable experiments to sort of play out there. Getting back to your
[Amit Varma]: sort of personal narrative, you also pointed out about how you could find escape in books,
[Amit Varma]: not just in terms of fiction, but also nonfiction. And that's fascinating, because for me, when I was
[Amit Varma]: a kid growing up, most of the escape that I found were really in fiction at that time, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in my teenage years, and all of that, elaborate a bit on what you meant by finding escape in books
[Amit Varma]: of nonfiction. And how was your reading? And how were your interests progressing through the reading
[Guest]: that you did? Yeah, and to clarify, maybe I wasn't clear, much of my escape was also in fiction,
[Guest]: there was some nonfiction, but I think that the nonfiction tended to be
[Guest]: just books of history on, you know, I remember reading some books on like Nazi Germany,
[Guest]: finding, you know, war again, as you know, young boys are likely to do finding that
[Guest]: exciting and wanting to know more. Again, my grandfather was an influence on this, he
[Guest]: liked reading books of history. I remember he, you know, him talking about books, you know,
[Guest]: old Hollywood movies on wars, like the Guns of Navarone was like a movie that I, for some reason,
[Guest]: sticks in my mind is something that he would he would talk about. But also the I think that the
[Guest]: sort of blend of mythology and history really was something that I was interested in. I would, you
[Guest]: know, I would read Amar Chitra Kathas and Twinkle comics. And I remember comics on the Ramayana and
[Guest]: the Mahabharata on Karna on sort of superpowers of these people. Because again, I think that it
[Guest]: goes back to my, you know, story bedside stories by my grandfather and him explaining, you know,
[Guest]: why Karna was really a hero and does not get his due. Or why is it that Krishna does not reveal
[Guest]: himself, you know, till the moment that he chooses, you know, why don't if you're a god,
[Guest]: because my question was, I suppose, a rational one for a child, which is that if you're a god,
[Guest]: and you're omniscient, and you're all powerful, then why don't you just end this? And so I think
[Guest]: those are the sort of interests that continued in that got funneled into other directions with
[Guest]: interests in, you know, books on history, etc. But it was mostly the world of fiction that I
[Guest]: was interested in, and the world of, you know, I also enjoyed watching, like I do today, I enjoyed
[Guest]: following popular culture, watching Bollywood movies, Hollywood movies, I loved, you know,
[Guest]: as I said, sports, consumed as much as I could of it. But yeah, but I think that my reading diet,
[Guest]: and my forms of escapism, maybe not escapism, but my forms of reading changed quite fundamentally
[Guest]: after I went to college, as it does for many people. And for me, the fact that it also was
[Guest]: a change of location was a time when I, I left home at 17 to live in a different city. I was
[Guest]: living by myself, I mean, though I have an aunt who lives in Delhi. So I had, you know, like what
[Guest]: they call a local guardian, who I'd visit every weekend, but living on my own, interacting with
[Guest]: people who are very different, linguistically, of course, from different parts of the country from
[Guest]: very different economic brackets. In some ways, I think that that is one of the great privileges
[Guest]: afforded by the university for everyone that you are, at least for me, it's the first time in my
[Guest]: life, in a group or class of people in a classroom filled with people from all over the country,
[Guest]: in a way in which, you know, I don't think really any school in any part of India really does.
[Guest]: And in a classroom, this is at Ramjas College in Delhi University, in which not everybody,
[Guest]: in fact, a very minority of my class in history, beginning, this was in 2004, spoke English in a
[Guest]: in a way that in which they would be comfortable chatting in English outside of class, right? They
[Guest]: all, you know, they all knew English, of course, and read and write and did their work in English.
[Guest]: And so for me, that meant that I had to shore up my skills in a different language that I had to,
[Guest]: also, it had people from different income backgrounds, people from very different
[Guest]: cultural backgrounds. It's not just income differences, but also cultural backgrounds.
[Guest]: I lived off campus in paying guest accommodation, very, very small, very humble. I remember my rent
[Guest]: was I think, 1750 for the first year after which it was hiked. Which year was this? This was 2004.
[Guest]: And I lived with in a sort of single room accommodation, which through staircases,
[Guest]: I mean, these all, of course, illegal buildings that were built for partitioned refugees. And so
[Guest]: I must have been in what must have been a storeroom at some point, which just had enough
[Guest]: space for a single bed, a single table and a single chair. But there was a kitchen that
[Guest]: people who lived in similar places like me, we shared. And they were from, they were friends of
[Guest]: mine, Anand and Abhishek Bhatia, who are both from from Bihar. And so who had very different,
[Guest]: you know, backgrounds and very different life experiences to me and very different cultural
[Guest]: references. Though, for example, they were of very similar, maybe, you know, economic background,
[Guest]: but they found the fact that I spoke primarily in English to be an oddity, right? And the fact
[Guest]: that I was not as comfortable as them in Hindi was a strange thing, which is understandable.
[Guest]: In Delhi, most people speak Hindi. And so I wasn't one of those. But you also encounter things that
[Guest]: you just would never imagine that you would first. I mean, I remember at Delhi University,
[Guest]: one of my first days going to college, somebody said, you are from Madras? And I said, you're
[Guest]: Madrasi? And I said, yes. And he said, but you're not black. I mean, there's literally and this is
[Guest]: not a joke. And so you realize that there's all these sort of, I mean, it's telling about the
[Guest]: sort of colorism that exists in our society, but also telling about how rarely this person had
[Guest]: obviously encountered somebody from the south. And so I suppose there was a mutual incomprehension,
[Guest]: like I found many things strange. But I suppose many people found me strange as well. But I and
[Guest]: I found the first year in Delhi quite difficult to get used to, to get used to this sort of
[Guest]: different climate, and not climate, I don't mean I don't mean in terms of weather, but I meant sort
[Guest]: of intellectual climate, cultural climate, to get used to a place that I don't know if you or your
[Guest]: listeners would, would feel the same, but some place that is much more aggressive than Chennai
[Guest]: is certainly seeing I remember very clearly being in a tutorial class behind my that was being taken
[Guest]: by Professor Hari Sen, who I heard is very recently retired from from the university,
[Guest]: wonderful teacher, but being in a tutorial and seeing behind him in the window, four men stomping
[Guest]: on another man very, very violently and sort of me trying to meekly say, you know, Sir, excuse me,
[Guest]: and him saying, you know, no, Nikhil, you need to wait your turn. And me trying to say that,
[Guest]: no, this is actually a matter of, of violence unfolding behind you. And so and this was the
[Guest]: sort of thing that at the time, I think that Ram just was going through a transition. I went there
[Guest]: recently, it's a much more elite college now. But at the time was undergoing quite a transition. And
[Guest]: there were these aspects of college life in Delhi, which again, is not like from what I've heard what
[Guest]: it was in the 90s. And earlier, but violence was pretty common. I mean, this, that this sort of
[Guest]: thing could happen was very common. I was told I was just telling a friend a couple of days ago,
[Guest]: I was told one of the reasons I didn't live on campus was because me and my father went to the
[Guest]: Ram Josh College hostel. And because my father, like, you know, many parents, you know, want
[Guest]: their children to, you know, rough it out. And they want them to, you know, go through the experience
[Guest]: of being in a hostel. And, you know, which I understood, and of course, it would be much
[Guest]: cheaper than living, it would be much cheaper than the 1750 that I would be paying outside.
[Guest]: But I remember somebody at the hostel telling my father,
[Guest]: and so basically, when a fight broke out, he was saying that this person has no protection. And so
[Guest]: I remember all of that being truly alarming to me. I hadn't, I knew about Delhi University and
[Guest]: ragging, I hadn't confronted the thought of like, there will be gangs, and that there will be,
[Guest]: there will actually be violence between them, and that I needed to have a side and that I need to
[Guest]: pick a side and be under the Chhatra Chhaya of one of these. And so, so those are the sort of
[Guest]: things that I found, I found quite, quite different and very new. And I think, overall,
[Guest]: it was to my benefit that I had those experiences and that I learned from them. But it did lead to,
[Guest]: it did lead to, coming back to literary diet, I think that my reading, my reading intake started
[Guest]: matching my mood, because I started going alone to a park, and reading lots of very depressing
[Guest]: Soviet authors, I was reading Maxim Gorky. And so, and it was, and so I realized at some point
[Guest]: that I needed after two or three of these extremely dreary, depressing books, I mean,
[Guest]: of uneven literary quality. I read all of Anna Karenina in these sort of first semester as well.
[Guest]: And, you know, again, an amazing book, but not really the most uplifting, right. And so it was
[Guest]: not really a form of escapism, in fact, was perhaps me just wallowing through my literary
[Guest]: taste as well to match my experiences in Delhi. But the things that are socially improved for me,
[Guest]: you know, later on, and I know, as everyone does, found my group of friends, many of whom are still
[Guest]: friends to this day. And I'm very grateful for, for all these experiences. And for, for all the,
[Guest]: you know, experiences of being, you know, a young student in Delhi, dealing with, you know,
[Guest]: having to kill rats in your kitchen, and, you know, and, and all the kinds of things that,
[Guest]: and all the kind of capers that one gets into, as a student, especially at a very large university.
[Guest]: And so I'm very grateful for that experience, especially because socially, it, it really,
[Guest]: and intellectually, as well, it really expanded my world, I had one, I had really good,
[Guest]: some exceptional teachers, who were very passionate, some of whom are like my teachers at
[Guest]: my school as well, thanked in the acknowledgements to my book, I think that it really taught me what
[Guest]: what a difference a committed and passionate teacher can make. Just having a teacher who've
[Guest]: who've looked like they were, that they believe that they were doing something important, and
[Guest]: that mattered, that we paid attention and that mattered, that we discussed these things. That
[Guest]: was was really inspiring. And, and so so yeah, so that was a real, it made a mark.
[Amit Varma]: Lots to double click on. So when when you pointed out to your teacher that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, there's violence behind him, what happened finished that story?
[Guest]: Oh, he, Professor Sen did the right thing. He got up and, and he was about to get to them
[Guest]: when I think that the, the college security got there, but actually, within five minutes of it,
[Guest]: the police was also there. And so luckily, he did not have to get involved in that.
[Guest]: And then we later on found out that the issue was also that the issue that apparently merited this,
[Guest]: this act of violence was that this was a boy again, just so mundane and, and sort of depressing
[Guest]: was that apparently this boy had, through rumours that these four guys were stomping on him,
[Guest]: kicking him, had heard that this boy had chadoed some girl at Hansraj, and that they had seen him
[Guest]: at the Hansraj canteen chadoing some Ram Jaskar. It was just, it was just like, levels of toxicity
[Guest]: layered upon other. And so these men decided that it's upon their honour to, despite this girl never
[Guest]: having complained from what all that we could think, we don't even know if this, whatever this,
[Guest]: this alleged incident took place. But that was apparently the trigger that that caused this,
[Guest]: this act of violence in the main lawn. It was not in some sort of furtive corner of the college
[Guest]: was in the main front lawn of the college. But yeah, yeah, so that that is what happened.
[Amit Varma]: And I get what you say about Delhi as well, like in, I finished my college in Pune in
[Amit Varma]: 94. And I worked for a few months in Delhi. And then I came to Bombay. And the reason is pretty
[Amit Varma]: much the same that at that time, I think Bombay as it then was, was one cosmopolitan city in India,
[Amit Varma]: where you could just come from anywhere and feel at home and you could just be yourself.
[Amit Varma]: And Delhi had that slight aggressive nature to it, especially if you're not privileged,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in the Delhi context, if you're not already settled there, and you're living in a
[Amit Varma]: nice house or whatever. If you're just a young person alone in the city, there is that period of
[Amit Varma]: settling in and, you know, trying to figure things out. Like I see sort of a couple of
[Amit Varma]: simultaneous tensions that one typically feels at this phase in life. And one is that you're
[Amit Varma]: just about trying to find yourself that you know, one is trying to define oneself Who am I? What do
[Amit Varma]: I want to do? What am I interested in? Where am I comfortable? And the other is, especially when
[Amit Varma]: you go to another city from where you are, is that you also want to fit in, you know, you also want
[Amit Varma]: to be with the cool boys, you also you don't want to seem like an outsider, you know, and all of
[Amit Varma]: that. So what were these simultaneous processes like that process of figuring out what you want
[Amit Varma]: to do with your life and who you want to be. And also the process of being in this environment with
[Amit Varma]: the potential which can potentially be hostile, but obviously, it wasn't necessarily like that all
[Amit Varma]: the time. But of, you know, that anxiety of fitting in, which so many of us as young people
[Guest]: have difficulty dealing with. Yeah, absolutely. I was in no way immune to it. Perhaps I'm not
[Guest]: immune to it even now. But but I think that what I didn't know is very clearly was what I wanted
[Guest]: to fit into. I mean, that's the other anxiety, right? That you, you layer on top of the anxiety
[Guest]: that you want to fit in, and you want to be part of some group. But then you don't know which group
[Guest]: either. And I was in a place where it didn't, there weren't, to me, very obvious groups that
[Guest]: I that I want to fit into, or certainly groups that would have me at least. And in the end,
[Guest]: what it ended up becoming was that I, I found that the the group in my college that
[Guest]: that seemed to have similar interest to me that that spoke and had similar cultural reference,
[Guest]: etc, tended to be the music society, I had no skill, the literary society, I perhaps similarly
[Guest]: had no skill, and then the debating society, in which I had no skill that I knew of, but I had not
[Guest]: tried it ever. And so I thought, maybe, let me see. It also was the case that that Ramji said
[Guest]: the time did not have a very well defined debating society. So it was amorphous enough in which
[Guest]: I could be a part of the crowd without having to distinguish myself. And then over time,
[Guest]: that became actually a part of my social life at the university. For the three years that I was
[Guest]: there, I was, I debated quite a bit, I was a debater, I suppose, I have mixed feelings about
[Guest]: it, because I made some wonderful friends, who I'm very close friends with till this day, who I'm,
[Guest]: you know, I'm extremely fond of and close to, and they are they are my some of my closest friends.
[Guest]: But I also sensed towards the end of my time as debating in Delhi, I also sensed that, that there
[Guest]: were some aspects to it that were not the most, not the best, let's just say, because it essentially
[Guest]: was, I realized, firstly, very gendered, I don't know if it's the case even today, but I think that
[Guest]: young men tend to be voluble, and young men, if they are given some sort of incentive, like money
[Guest]: at the end of it can be even more voluble. But the problem is, I think that it's a, that there can be
[Guest]: these perverse incentives that you are young, you don't really, you want to please, you want to be
[Guest]: part of a crowd, you want to be liked. And you are told, through all the sort of social cues there
[Guest]: are, and financial incentives, that if you come up with some glib argument, that puts down somebody
[Guest]: else that can sometimes be sometimes maybe even be unfair, many times unfair, and certainly not
[Guest]: sincerely held political positions or policy positions, but that you are just rewarded for it
[Guest]: by literally with talis and with people clapping. And, and that's fine. It's fine. You know, if you
[Guest]: develop a facility for thinking of, you know, different sides of an argument, but I think that
[Guest]: it can also lead to just being glib about many things, believing that, well, there are two sides
[Guest]: to everything, and that there are many sides to everything, and therefore not really thinking
[Guest]: about, well, what do I really believe in? And what are the actual political and social costs of these
[Guest]: things, just because you are so attuned to thinking in this manner, which is actually kind of shallow.
[Guest]: And so I started thinking, I started feeling, having much more mixed feelings about it. But,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, maybe, I don't know, maybe that was after I stopped debating, and that I was
[Guest]: looking back on it. I don't know if I was particularly troubled by it at the time, because
[Guest]: to me, it was an escape route. It was a way in which to have a social circle of like minded people
[Guest]: of friends, of having a social life of having people that I could hang out with, of traveling,
[Guest]: even on debates of at a time in which, you know, I'd relied entirely on my parents for money that
[Guest]: I could feel like, okay, now, you know, I can make some a little bit, it's not just we're talking
[Guest]: very, very small amounts, but at the time, they feel they feel large, right? So if you get 1000
[Guest]: rupees at the end of a debate that you win, that's most of your rent for, you know, that's as you
[Guest]: know, it feels like and so what you could do with that also felt like, they felt like princely sums.
[Guest]: And so yeah, so I have these mixed feelings. But it was really, I really need, I have to
[Guest]: acknowledge that that was what, in some ways got me out of a bit of a funk, you know, instead of
[Guest]: being at the local park and out from lines, reading Maxim Gorky, at least as out with friends.
[Amit Varma]: And so I think there is something to be said for that.
[Amit Varma]: What was the next step in your path after that? Like, were you already thinking of going further
[Amit Varma]: in terms of studying history, being a historian or whatever? You know, what did it take for you
[Amit Varma]: to sort of find that groove? Because many people kind of just drift along and they do the next
[Amit Varma]: logical thing and they take where, you know, circumstances in life are taking them while
[Amit Varma]: others admirably, you know, have it all figured out from the start that, okay, this is what I'm
[Amit Varma]: going to do. And then I'm going to do that next, and so on and so forth. So what was that journey
[Guest]: like to getting to where you eventually got? Yeah, I suppose I fall in the unadmirable camp,
[Guest]: I did not have it all figured out. I was not a planner at the time, at least. And I knew that
[Guest]: I liked history. I knew it from the time I was in high school that I enjoyed history. I enjoyed it,
[Guest]: even at the time that I was in college. I suppose I did, you know, I was doing all right in it.
[Guest]: So that was some sort of signal that, you know, maybe it's not the worst decision to stick to
[Guest]: something that you're all right at. There were, of course, had like everyone who does history,
[Guest]: or some of the liberal arts in college had many people wondering and asking, you know,
[Guest]: for my own benefit, you know, where this is leading? How is this going to lead to some sort
[Guest]: of employment? And whether I had thought about the big issue and the elephant in the room of
[Guest]: remuneration at some point, at some point in my life. And I suppose, choosing to ignore all these
[Guest]: very concerned questions, I decided that I just needed to do a master's in history. And suppose
[Guest]: I was just then being carried along by the current of, but I like doing this. I'm not,
[Guest]: I'm not bad at it. I seem to be okay at it. People seem to think I'm good at it. And so
[Guest]: and so I went to the university for my master's, I was at the university, I was
[Guest]: sort of changed college affiliations, but I basically stayed in the International Students
[Guest]: House, which I mean, I'm not international, I'm an Indian citizen, but they had some kind of,
[Guest]: you know, quotas for people who did extracurriculars and somehow, and the life there
[Guest]: was definitely better than and then staying in my paying guest accommodations. And so again,
[Guest]: it was like, now I was staying in this place with people from all over the world, many African
[Guest]: nations, many Asian countries. And so that was a nice experience. And it, it came with much more
[Guest]: comfortable lodgings I for the first time had again, to maybe to younger listeners,
[Guest]: this might sound strange, but it was only my master's when I was well into my, you know,
[Guest]: I was maybe 19 or 20 at the time that I got my first laptop, partly which I could pay for,
[Guest]: you know, partly through, you know, the fact that I had, you know, I could tell my parents that,
[Guest]: you know, I've saved some money from these debates. And so they were like, okay, so you know,
[Guest]: you deserve a laptop at this point. And, and, and so, you know, life sort of became much more
[Guest]: comfortable on a day to day basis. But also, I began to think about my future and sort of career
[Guest]: prospects more seriously once I was in the master's, because of course, then you're doing
[Guest]: an advanced degree. And, and so I started thinking, looking at people and thinking, oh,
[Guest]: is that a path I could follow? Can I see myself as a historian? It still seemed very farfetched.
[Guest]: Well, there are moments when even now it seems very farfetched. But and certainly I don't compare
[Guest]: myself to the people I had, I had as my models at the time, I looked at the professors I had
[Guest]: at the time. And, and these are some excellent teachers and scholars, right? We're talking
[Guest]: Shahid Amin, Dilip Menon, these are some really Sunil Kumar, these are all, you know, really,
[Guest]: really scholars who had made a name for themselves in their scholarship alone, but also were very
[Guest]: good teachers. It was also at a time in which there were debates, I mean, there have been debates
[Guest]: about the polarization of history, you know, since independence, certainly so since the Babri
[Guest]: Masjid came down in 92. But in 2008, which is when I was in my first year of my master's was also
[Guest]: this the huge, I don't know if you remember, but this 300 Ramayanas episode in Delhi University,
[Guest]: where I was actually in a class with Professor Sunil Kumar, and we were taking an exam and a
[Guest]: brick came flying through the window, you know, through smashing the glass, and luckily didn't
[Guest]: hurt any of the students, it fell in one of the rows between us. And there was then this, then
[Guest]: we heard this sort of chanting outside by a, like, what was literally quite a mob of ABVP students,
[Guest]: ABVP students, who were protesting against a essay written by the very eminent scholar,
[Guest]: A.K. Ramanujan, you know, written in the, you know, decades ago, decades, certainly before 2008,
[Guest]: called the 300 Ramayans, which is about the various traditions of the Ramayanas across the world,
[Guest]: right across Southeast Asia, and within India itself. This was seen as some kind of some sort
[Guest]: of apostasy by the ABVP, who said there is only one Ramayan, and there aren't these different
[Guest]: Ramayans in which some in which as we know, like in the South and in Sri Lanka, where Ravan is seen
[Guest]: as the as the real protagonist and the hero. And so for the sin of being the chair of the department
[Guest]: that had admitted this essay into its syllabus, also just happened to be a Muslim man, Professor
[Guest]: Jafri was roughed up, they came into the department and started pushing the head of the department
[Guest]: around. We were again locked into the room so they couldn't come in. But that led to afterwards,
[Guest]: the entire student body of our class, joining with other students across the campus in this kind of
[Guest]: show of solidarity with Professor Jafri and with the fact that you should be allowed to study
[Guest]: whatever text you want, especially at the master's level, if it's been vetted by other academics,
[Guest]: and even if not vetted by other academics, you should just be able to study whatever text you
[Guest]: want. And this was not even didn't even seem like a controversial choice. This was a very,
[Guest]: a very eminent academics essay on a subject that is universally acknowledged as existing,
[Guest]: which led to almost, you know, it was late in the evening, a kind of showdown between
[Guest]: our students and this ABVP. And the ABVP was obviously not interested in this,
[Guest]: necessarily for the intellectual reasons about the Ramayana, but it was also part of,
[Guest]: you know, DUSU politics, Delhi University Student Union politics and all of that.
[Guest]: But you know, there was this sort of police barricade between us and the students. And
[Guest]: in some ways, history, which had always been alive in Delhi in these ways in which
[Guest]: we had read about and talked about the ways in which history is politicized, it became much
[Guest]: more real. But the fact that history and just such mundane matters as what is in a syllabus
[Guest]: can ignite such passions was a real revelation to me. And that sense has stayed with me. And
[Guest]: of course, in today's day, you know, this we still live in the age of the history wars.
[Guest]: But that sense of aggrievement mapped onto the syllabus that some other student, it wasn't as
[Guest]: if any of these students were being forced to study it. There might have been MA history students
[Guest]: amongst them, but that was not there. It wasn't that we as students do not want to study this.
[Guest]: It's that you as scholars or scholars in training should not be studying this because it offends
[Guest]: our sentiments. And I think that that was very eye opening to me.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that two contradictory conclusions can be made about history here.
[Amit Varma]: And one is that history is therefore not some boring dead subject. It's more relevant than
[Amit Varma]: ever. Like you said, it's alive. It has, you know, history, in a sense, becomes a basis for
[Amit Varma]: things people do, and therefore it is important, and so on and so forth. And at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: the contradictory impulse is also to think that this actually makes history irrelevant,
[Amit Varma]: because we are trapped in narrative battles, and it doesn't matter what actually happened or why
[Amit Varma]: it actually happened. You know, everything is eventually going to be, you know, simplified
[Amit Varma]: within the ideological echo chambers where they emerge. Even the way we look at Nehru, for example,
[Amit Varma]: right, you have a nuanced view of all the protagonists in the book, Nehru, Mahalananda,
[Amit Varma]: everyone. But in the sort of the marketplace of ideas, as it were today, and I shouldn't even
[Amit Varma]: dignify it with that term. But in the discourse that we see, especially on social media,
[Amit Varma]: you just have polarized views. Either he was, you know, an out of touch, deracinated elite,
[Amit Varma]: who was responsible for everything that went wrong with India, or he's a great liberal,
[Amit Varma]: secular democratic leader who built this country and shaped our institutions. And both of those
[Amit Varma]: are true, and both of those are untrue. And it's just a complicated story. And that's what history
[Amit Varma]: is. History is complicated. You know, in these times, it often seems that it doesn't matter.
[Amit Varma]: So how do you think about these sort of dual sentiments, which kind of collide with each
[Amit Varma]: other? Because on the one hand, it can add an urgency to what you do, not just in terms of the
[Amit Varma]: specific, not just in terms of the way that you do your history, but also the things that you choose
[Amit Varma]: to write about. But at the same time, you might realize that everything is being politicized,
[Amit Varma]: everything is about narratives. Forget that, let me go on my pursuit of truth. That is my dharma as
[Amit Varma]: a historian. That's what I got to do. So how do you sort of think about all of this?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, first, I'd say that, Amit, you've actually portrayed the debate in the marketplace
[Guest]: of ideas, perhaps too charitably. I mean, I wish that the debate was just between is Nehru a
[Guest]: deracinated Anglophone versus is he a great liberal hero? I mean, if those were the polls,
[Guest]: I think we'd be in a much better place. But the debate really is Nehru as, you know, if you type
[Guest]: Nehru on YouTube or something, it's like Nehru syphilis, you know, womanizer, responsible for
[Guest]: every ill that India has today. And so I think that, I think that that's where we are. And I
[Guest]: think that's, I think that in some ways, it is inescapable. I think that there has never and
[Guest]: there will never be a time in which history, especially recent history or history relating
[Guest]: to the founding of a nation will be apolitical, in that there's no way in which for it to be
[Guest]: for it to be seen as apolitical, because it matters so much to the identity of the nation
[Guest]: and of its citizens, right? You could, again, to take it to a different context, we see similar
[Guest]: things in America as well, right? In America, there are again, debates that are start with
[Guest]: debates, maybe even amongst historians, but then is made out into completely something else
[Guest]: different, such as say, with the 1619 project, the New York Times, the 1619 project, which is the
[Guest]: study of slavery in America and a sort of a provocation to think about what if the founding
[Guest]: of America is thought of as 1619, which is when the first transatlantic slaves are brought to
[Guest]: America rather than 1776, which is formally the birth of their nation. That has led to a huge
[Guest]: Republican conservative backlash such that President Trump was talking about it. And again,
[Guest]: so you see that these kinds of history battles are in some ways inescapable. And I think that
[Guest]: the point is not to shy away from it. But the point is, what is the role is for different people
[Guest]: to decide what their role in that is? Do you want to just be a sort of keyboard warrior pouring fuel
[Guest]: on the fire by, you know, typing random stuff on YouTube comments about how either, you know,
[Guest]: is Nehru responsible for all these ills? Or is the Congress Party this, you know, wonderful
[Guest]: institution that cannot be criticized? Or do you want to actually learn about it? And then,
[Guest]: of course, that is not uncomplicated, because then where do you go to learn about it? Because,
[Guest]: of course, we do not live in a marketplace that is necessarily very efficient in sort of
[Guest]: channeling you towards the best sources of information. In fact, quite the opposite,
[Guest]: right? With Facebook and with algorithmic knowledge enterprises, you are therefore
[Guest]: actually directed towards the more controversial ones, which tend to be often the least scholarly
[Guest]: ones. So I think that for the citizen, there's a challenge. But that challenge is different from
[Guest]: then the challenge for me as a citizen, but also a scholar of modern Indian history in which I have
[Guest]: to decide what is my role to be. And I tell my students that there is no view from nowhere,
[Guest]: right? You can aspire to an Archimedean viewpoint in the pure sciences, but you cannot
[Guest]: in history. In any subject in which the human being is involved so much, you have to,
[Guest]: there will be some biases. Now, what historical training does is to try to weed out those biases,
[Guest]: or at least provide the reader of my articles or books ways in which to identify my biases, right?
[Guest]: So that would be that I provide rigorous citation of all my sources so that you, Amit, you can read
[Guest]: my book, you can go through my sources and say, okay, so these are the sources used,
[Guest]: he's chosen not to look at these, or he's chosen to look at only these. So that's what I have to
[Guest]: judge him on. And you can decide, well, is that biased? And in which way is it biased?
[Guest]: You can then verify my sources by saying he claims to have looked at X number of files in
[Guest]: the National Archives and this particular file, I'm going to go and check, right? Which is the
[Guest]: closest that we have to replicability in science. I'm going to go and check whether this quote from
[Guest]: Hal Nobis actually, he said it or not, or didn't Deshmukh actually say this? Or is this something
[Guest]: that Nikhil has made up for some kind of rhetorical flourish? So those are the ways in which we can
[Guest]: check for biases, not eliminate them, but perhaps make them a part of your process and make them
[Guest]: apparent to the reader so that they know where you come from. And I think that mostly I find at
[Guest]: least with students, because at least with students also, you have a assumption of trust,
[Guest]: because in a classroom, as opposed to me as an author sitting on one side of a screen versus
[Guest]: somebody who's reading an excerpt of the book on some website and wants to post something nasty
[Guest]: about Nehru, and then my book is just the vehicle for that. There is no shared trust there. Whereas,
[Guest]: but in the classroom, there's an assumption of good faith between the students and the teacher,
[Guest]: hopefully. I think that we usually have that. And in that case, I tell students at the beginning of
[Guest]: a course on modern Indian Pakistan that my biases really are towards, I am an Indian citizen, I have
[Guest]: views on my country, but I'm also a scholar. And so I will try to keep my personal views on his
[Guest]: politics separate from what I teach. But on the other hand, I do not have two sides on the 1984
[Guest]: Sikh massacres, right? There are no two, I'm not going to provide you a Congress, Jagdish
[Guest]: title of justification. There are, to me, no two sides on the Godhra as well, right? Those are my
[Guest]: biases are pro-democracy, pro-human rights. That's what you have to take me as. And if you feel that
[Guest]: that is, if you believe in illiberal democracy, then yes, you can, you can call me out on that
[Guest]: being my bias, but I own up to that. And so I think I find that that is a useful way of thinking
[Guest]: about history is that no, nobody can claim to be. So if someone is saying that they're absolutely
[Guest]: bias-free, I think that that is, that is not true. But what you can say is, is this person,
[Guest]: has this person trained to do so? That does not just mean credentialing. It means that you don't,
[Guest]: might not have a PhD in history, but that you follow all the methods that historians do,
[Guest]: right? Which is that you are rigorous with your sources, citation, et cetera.
[Guest]: Is your work peer reviewed? Is it reviewed by others in a way in which it's a blind, especially
[Guest]: such that they are able to eliminate obvious errors in it? Again, can there be works that
[Guest]: still have errors? Yes. But has it gone through a certain filter that suggests to you that, okay,
[Guest]: so-and-so might be trusted when they say this, not infallible, but might be trusted. But that's
[Guest]: the same with scientists as well, right? Scientists also get certain things wrong,
[Guest]: but we trust them overall because they've been through certain processes that suggest to us that
[Guest]: they have become experts in that. And so I would think that that's the way I would like to,
[Guest]: to think about my role, but also about how, if you're a citizen of India and you are interested
[Guest]: in history and you want to know what, who to trust, this is, I would say the way to do it,
[Guest]: which is that what are, and try to triangulate the motivations of the people, right? If it's
[Guest]: a party spokesperson, maybe don't trust that person entirely on the history of their own party,
[Guest]: which is not to say that party spokespersons cannot be scholars, but maybe that shouldn't
[Guest]: be your only source for it, right? And if you're reading on the Nehru years, I would encourage
[Guest]: people to read my book, but certainly read other books that have a different view as well and see
[Guest]: which is more persuasive. And I think that there is no substitute for that work. And that is the
[Guest]: quandary that we find ourselves in. But I think that it's inescapable. And I think that we have to,
[Guest]: we just have to be a part of it. We can't retreat to ivory towers and citadels. That is not a
[Amit Varma]: privilege that we have. Well, sir, I don't know how many party spokesmen are listening to this,
[Amit Varma]: but they're just thinking, what did we do? It was going well, why did you bring us in the middle?
[Amit Varma]: But I think they'll be okay. I think they'll be okay, if they are listening to this. So take me
[Amit Varma]: through the rest of your journey then, you know, at what point do you say that, okay, this is it,
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to do this for the rest of my life, there is going to be no MBA, there is going to
[Amit Varma]: be no whatever, this is my path, I am going to do this. And when you think about it in that manner,
[Amit Varma]: is it just the subject that you're thinking about that I love doing history, this is great fun,
[Amit Varma]: and I can make a career out of this in academia, and so I'll do this? Or have you also at this
[Amit Varma]: point in time, formed specific domains where you say that, okay, I'm really interested in
[Amit Varma]: post independent history, for example, or this kind of journey is a journey I want to take and
[Amit Varma]: how influential were the teachers you had, or perhaps the writers you read or were influenced
[Amit Varma]: by at that time? How influential were other people in sort of helping you find this way?
[Guest]: Yeah, the question of when did I decide that I'm not going to do an MBA is can be said as when did
[Guest]: I decide to disappoint my father? No, I'm kidding. My father's very supportive. But it means that
[Guest]: certain yes, once you start doing an MA and an MPhil, certain avenues do start closing. And so
[Guest]: I was joking about my father, he's, he's very, been very supportive, despite really having a
[Guest]: very different background than me, not having the privileges I had, my father, as I said, had a sales
[Guest]: job started had to, right after college, start working for a living and to support a wife and
[Guest]: children and support his parents as well. So, you know, through most of his, his adult life has had
[Guest]: to support two households, you know, is is a life that's very different from mine and much more
[Guest]: difficult, went, you know, house to house selling, say, shaving sticks. And so, and so, you know,
[Guest]: of course, he was concerned, like, like many people were, you know, what is this going to lead
[Guest]: to? Like, what do people who do and not just a BA in history, but an MA in history, this looks
[Guest]: dangerously like you want to try to become a historian? Or is it going to be civil services,
[Guest]: maybe perhaps? But no, I think even at the MA stage, I think that I, I think I kept career
[Guest]: options open. I don't don't even know really what the my, what I would parachute into. But I think
[Guest]: I just thought that, you know, maybe till the end of the MA, other things may be possible, you know,
[Guest]: maybe, maybe journalism, maybe law, maybe, maybe the civil services, even though I just don't think
[Guest]: the civil services was not something that I thought of very seriously. And I think part of it was
[Guest]: because of my experience as an undergrad, in Outroom Lines, in this paying guest accommodation,
[Guest]: one of the people that lived with us, I mean, live, you know, in this sort of, in this warren
[Guest]: of small little rooms, was somebody who was preparing for the civil services. And it seemed
[Guest]: like just such a grind, such hard work. And that even after all that hard work, the chances of
[Guest]: success was so slim, and seemed to hinge on some things that could seem just quite idiosyncratic,
[Guest]: that it really kind of put me off the idea. And so that was not what I would...
[Guest]: Did he make it?
[Guest]: In the end, I think he decided to go a different direction. I think he decided to try to become
[Guest]: a judge. I mean, that's the last I had, I'd heard of him. But and so it was, you know, he didn't he,
[Guest]: when I'd met him, it was already his second year trying, and he had tried two or three years. And
[Guest]: so that was sort of very dispiriting to see, you know, every day to see the sort of stress and the
[Guest]: toll that it took. And in some ways, just put hitting pause on your life for two, three years,
[Guest]: living away from family, just trying to crack this one exam. And because, you know, as listeners
[Guest]: will know, I mean, that's what it takes. I mean, you can't do other things on the side. It is all
[Guest]: or nothing. And so that sort of put me off. And I don't think I really considered that very
[Guest]: seriously. But by the end of my master's, I felt that I, I think I'd started thinking about doing
[Guest]: doing a PhD. And I'd also started thinking that I might want to, I definitely wanted to, to go
[Guest]: abroad, just as a life experience. Because I'd spent by the end of my master's five years in
[Guest]: Delhi. But I also felt that if I wanted to get into the kind of program that I wanted, that I
[Guest]: needed to do some research, I also needed to get some sense of what research is like, if I was
[Guest]: going to embark on an entire PhD. And so I enrolled in a PhD at JNU, which is, which is another
[Guest]: wonderful experience. It is, in some ways, the most economically diverse group of students that
[Guest]: I've been with, the most liberal in terms of the ethos amongst the students, the most safe, for
[Guest]: example, that women on any campus I've been on in India have felt ever. And so the life of, you
[Guest]: know, being at the Dhaba late at night, discussing your readings, discussing ideas, that was very,
[Guest]: very exciting, and intellectually extremely stimulating. And of course, I had the great
[Guest]: privilege of working with wonderful scholars and teachers, again, who really are a model to me of
[Guest]: what can be done if you really commit yourself to public education, to education, which does
[Guest]: not remunerate you very much, but you're still committed to it, because you believe in the cause
[Guest]: of education, of doing this as a sort of, as a service that to society, not just as career
[Guest]: advancement, but as history and being a teacher as a calling. And it was when I was at JNU,
[Guest]: and to me, it's been a real, it's been a source of real dismay and anguish that JNU has come in
[Guest]: the past few years to be associated with just with being anti-national, with being, I mean,
[Guest]: the people at JNU was, you know, some of the most patriotic I've met, because they were anguished
[Guest]: and angry about the state of India, precisely because they cared so much. And it's been a real
[Guest]: source of sadness that JNU has come to be in the public mind associated with this kind of thing.
[Guest]: And of course, also that students from JNU were just sort of arrested. Omar Khalid was in my
[Guest]: MPhil cohort, he was in classes with me. And to think that somebody that I was not a friend, per
[Guest]: se, I mean, we knew each other. But to think that somebody I was sitting in a classroom with has
[Guest]: been in jail now for what, a year and a half, based on very flimsy evidence. And, but and
[Guest]: regardless of the merits of the case being slandered on public television with accusations,
[Guest]: which are not even made by the government, accusations just made by television pundits
[Guest]: about being, you know, a Pakistani spy or, you know,
[Guest]: And not just allegations, doctored videos.
[Guest]: Doctored videos, right. And so to think that it's possible to just ruin the life of someone,
[Guest]: I'm not to say that his life is ruined. He has a long life ahead of him. And hopefully, he is out
[Guest]: of jail very soon. But to think that when the state turns on you, and when sections of the media
[Guest]: can also turn on you in that way, that the results can be so enormous on somebody that was so that
[Guest]: whose life basically mirrored yours, right? He lived in a hostel on campus, I live in a hostel
[Guest]: on campus, he went to the hostel to eat his food, I went to think, we sat in the same classes.
[Guest]: But that, at that point, he was doing an MPhil thesis, I was doing an MPhil thesis,
[Guest]: both of us were doing, you know, going to the archives once in a while, that the idea that,
[Guest]: that an event like that can just suddenly change your life so much is quite astounding.
[Amit Varma]: Does it make you rethink what it feels like to be an Indian? Does it make you rethink the whole
[Amit Varma]: project? I mean, it's very clear that the one fundamental difference between you and Umar is
[Amit Varma]: that he's Muslim. Yes. And there's no putting a sheen on it. And Kashmiri. And Kashmiri. And
[Amit Varma]: there's no putting a sheen on it that there is so much anti-Muslim politics that is dominant
[Amit Varma]: today. I think that is a core problem with our politics today. And does it kind of make you
[Amit Varma]: wonder? I mean, this is a question I've also asked in other forums, for example, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you know, how libertarians feel about taxes, right? Now, the thing is, even accepting that
[Amit Varma]: fine, that some amount of taxes are necessary, you need a state to protect our rights, blah,
[Amit Varma]: blah, blah. And then you argue on the margins about when is it justified? When is it not
[Amit Varma]: justified? But I've come to recently start thinking about that when your taxes are being
[Amit Varma]: used for bulldozers, and the kind of things that are being done in your name, you know,
[Amit Varma]: then is that even moral? What does citizenship mean? How do you look at your relationship with
[Amit Varma]: the state? And I must clarify for all the tax officers listening to this that they will find
[Amit Varma]: I'm a law abiding citizen, and I pay all my taxes well. But just at that moral level of thinking of
[Amit Varma]: what does it mean to be an Indian, and also the incredible, this quiet that it gives me
[Amit Varma]: gives me to see this happening. Because this is not anymore, a fringe sentiment, right? This is, this is our
[Amit Varma]: politics, in a sense, this is our democracy expressing itself. So, you know, what do you feel?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, there's it's bigotry, there's just no two ways about it. And it's bigotry that is
[Guest]: that is, unfortunately, mainstream, and is also given not just political encouragement, but
[Guest]: patronage. And it isn't a new sentiment in India, there has been bigotry of, you know, all sorts
[Guest]: in India, I'm sure always human beings are human beings. But it is one thing when it is seen as
[Guest]: shameful in, in the broad public sphere. And it is one thing when it is rewarded, right rewarded with
[Guest]: career advancement with political positions, etc. I, I had, I'd heard extremely bigoted views when I
[Guest]: when I came to, only because this is one of the first times I was having this kind of conversation
[Guest]: in college, again, in my paying guest accommodations, one of the people that lived with us
[Guest]: would talk about again, you know, his views on history, which were completely unmoored by fact,
[Guest]: but about how, jab musalman aaye the to hindu ke lashe, you know, I mean, that there was just
[Guest]: like, you know, mountains of these Hindu bodies that were always every day, piling up. Again,
[Guest]: not to say that, you know, early modern India was some sort of paradisiacal place where there was no,
[Guest]: you know, inter communal violence or conflict. Far from it, India was has always been a casteist
[Guest]: and been a religiously divided place. But this was certainly a huge exaggeration about the nature
[Guest]: and it was about the talking about, you know, Mughal rule, etc. And I think that those views
[Guest]: that at the time seemed to shock me because of how extreme it was, and how far away it was from what
[Guest]: any scholar had been able to prove, right? I mean, the point about these sort of things is that if it
[Guest]: is so true, there must be some scholar who should be able to prove this sort of thing. And of course,
[Guest]: the retort you get is, well, all of them are leftists. But then you think that human incentives
[Guest]: are such that there'd be such enormous rewards, if you were able to prove incontrovertibly,
[Guest]: that actually this happened, right? Original research is rewarded as amongst historians,
[Guest]: we respect original research and making a big intervention like that would be something that
[Guest]: would make everyone sit up and notice. But the fact is that it is again, it's the sort of assertion
[Guest]: that is unfalsifiable. It's that because then it gets to if you say, well, that doesn't seem to be
[Guest]: true. It's like, well, all of you are of a certain ideological disposition. And I think that it's
[Guest]: views like that, that I have noticed every time I have come back to India, especially in the last
[Guest]: sort of 10 years or so, especially in the last, you know, five, six years, that it is just more
[Guest]: and more openly expressed, expressed not in, you know, conversations amongst friends over dinner,
[Guest]: like it was the first time I heard it, but now just Kulayam, you know, now just
[Guest]: without any sense of shame, without any sense that what you're saying is, is cruel and narrow
[Guest]: minded. And it's led to, to me feeling, I mean, I am, I feel patriotic as an Indian. But patriotism
[Guest]: does not mean that you do not feel shame. That's at least in the way that I think of.
[Guest]: Of, in fact, it can be why you feel. Yes, I mean, it is, I feel shame because I care about,
[Guest]: about India. I am, I mean, I live abroad, I'm an Indian citizen. And I work, my work is on India,
[Guest]: my family, much my family lives here, my wife and child live, we live in the United States.
[Guest]: I mean, without even going into the sort of tedious debate of, well, then why do you live
[Guest]: elsewhere? But the way that I feel about it is, yes, it is complicated by the fact that this
[Guest]: happens. But there has never been a time in which I think you can just feel uncomplicatedly happy
[Guest]: about everything about your country. But this I do feel is, this is particularly vicious. And it,
[Guest]: and there seems to be, it seems to only be getting worse, to the point where I have, I have the
[Guest]: privilege not of being Hindu, of being an upper caste Hindu man. And so it doesn't directly affect
[Guest]: me. But I have friends, I have close friends who are Muslim or are married to somebody who's Muslim.
[Guest]: And to them, this is a real concern. To them, they are discussing whether to leave India.
[Guest]: And if they live abroad, but had plans to come back to India to actually something that 10 years
[Guest]: ago, I would not have thought was possible, but making actual life plans saying that we want to
[Guest]: go back to India, but we don't think it's, if we have a Muslim child, we don't think that this is
[Guest]: actually a safe or the best decision. If we have other options, why would we choose this? And so
[Guest]: I think that it's that. And it's when I have those conversations that it really sort of,
[Guest]: it strikes me with the force really of a sledgehammer that this is a privilege. My
[Guest]: privilege is that I only have to think about this when something in politics comes up, right? But
[Guest]: if you are of certain communities, this must be a sort of, even if you're a privileged
[Guest]: and of with economic means, it still must be this sort of low boil existential dread about
[Guest]: is violence around the corner. And it must have been what, you know, being Sikh in North India
[Guest]: and Delhi must have been in the in the late 80s after 84, right? That this community that seemed
[Guest]: once like it had, that I was enveloped in affection with, and I seem to have been integrated into, in
[Guest]: the best cases, has completely turned on me. And so not that Muslims ever in India, I think, have
[Guest]: felt that, you know, they were completely well integrated and embraced. But that, and I think
[Guest]: that again, that's a memory I have from 92 in Bombay as well, the sense that of people turning
[Guest]: on each other of, of our colony being referred to as a Hindu colony, as SBI colony being a Hindu
[Guest]: colony, people wondering whether they should go to the local grocer who we got our groceries from,
[Guest]: who was who was Muslim. But remembering that my mother made it a point to tell me that, you know,
[Guest]: when there was this bun that nobody was setting out, but my mother had to set out because my
[Guest]: father was out of town to get us some groceries, but that she got it from this Muslim grocer who
[Guest]: had of course shut his shop because it was a Hindu colony. But that when she went there,
[Guest]: a window opened and from the side, little bag of groceries, without my mother choosing,
[Guest]: because there's no time for it, this person just chose what was to be in there and just
[Guest]: furtively gave it to my mother, who he knew was Hindu and in a Hindu colony. And in that little
[Guest]: thing, this man who must have been dreading for his life, given his social circumstances and his
[Guest]: economic circumstances, had the largeness of heart to slip into this bag, the chocolate bar that I
[Guest]: liked. And that is the sort of thing that those are the kinds of bonds that cannot last much longer
[Guest]: if this kind of thing continues. And that is something that saddens me and I see around me
[Guest]: and I realize that I can never really share that experience of others and it really is a just
[Amit Varma]: unmitigated shame. You know, what I agree with you on and what is sort of heartbreaking is that
[Amit Varma]: something is fundamentally changed. Like, yes, of course, Muslims were always, there was that
[Amit Varma]: tension, they were never kind of never quite treated as if they are part of this country.
[Amit Varma]: But there is a very moving story about Ehsan Jafri, that Jafri who had suffered from previous
[Amit Varma]: riots, I think in the 60s or whatever, and had lost his home and all that. He chose not to go
[Amit Varma]: to a ghetto. He was asked once, why are you staying where you are surrounded by Hindus?
[Amit Varma]: And he said that no, to go to a Muslim ghetto today to withdraw into that, even if it's safer,
[Amit Varma]: would be to betray my idea of India, to betray what I believe in. I will not do that. I believe
[Amit Varma]: that we can coexist and stay and, and we all know what happened to Ehsan Jafri, right? And that to
[Amit Varma]: me is, it's such a great betrayal. And I sort of see it playing out, you know, Kapil Kaumireddy
[Amit Varma]: in an episode he did with me once pointed out that, you know, the Hindus who stayed in India
[Amit Varma]: after partition, it's a default thing, this is where you are. But the Muslims who could have
[Amit Varma]: gone but who chose to stay here, they chose something, they chose that same idea that Ehsan
[Amit Varma]: Jafri chose, right? And to now reward them in this way, is utterly sort of heartbreaking for
[Amit Varma]: me. And you pointed out about, you know, your lament about how, you know, people in JNU are
[Amit Varma]: now treated as if they're anti-national. And there is this little bit in your book as well,
[Amit Varma]: where you quote B. R. Brahmanand, you know, talking about how when B. R. Shenoy and C. N.
[Amit Varma]: Bakil and Mr. Brahmanand himself objected to the second five-year plan, that they were,
[Amit Varma]: you know, sidelined and left out of planning committee meetings and, you know, branded
[Amit Varma]: anti-nationals and CIA agents, you know, but there, you know, it's that common thing of dissent
[Amit Varma]: causing you to be called anti-national. But today, what we see is your identity, your location is
[Amit Varma]: enough for you to be called anti-national. So I do think that, I mean, I tend to be more
[Amit Varma]: pessimistic than others, I mean, but I do think that something fundamental has shifted. And it's
[Amit Varma]: sad, and I don't know where we are going to go. So maybe, maybe, you know, like the rest of the
[Amit Varma]: country, and the country can't take a break, but we can take a break. So let's take a quick break
[Amit Varma]: So let's take a quick break and continue our conversation on the other side.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene and the unseen. I'm chatting with Nikhil Menon,
[Amit Varma]: and we are discussing, still discussing his fascinating journey, we'll get to the book
[Amit Varma]: eventually. So we've gotten you all the way to the point where you're sort of doing your PhD at
[Amit Varma]: JNU, and you're thinking of taking it even further, the further, the further than that, or you're
[Amit Varma]: doing your MPhil in JNU. You're doing your MPhil in JNU, and you're thinking of going even further.
[Amit Varma]: So take me through sort of the rest of your journey from there until before the book.
[Guest]: Yeah, maybe I should be more rapid, because perhaps one of the reasons we've taken so long
[Amit Varma]: is that I'm being long winded. No, you're being great. Please, please don't artificially hurry
[Guest]: it up. We have time. Well, my PhD took the longest, it took five to six years, so we could
[Guest]: be here forever. No, so from, from JNU, I left after two years after my MPhil to do my PhD in
[Guest]: the US. And that was a real change. I had not ever been to the US before. I hadn't been abroad
[Guest]: actually very many times, maybe, I think two or three times maybe before that. And so it was,
[Guest]: it was a culture shock in the way that, in a way like moving from Madras to Delhi was,
[Guest]: but in a very different way in that it was different, but comfortable, not in a different,
[Guest]: but very intimidating. Part of it could be that I moved to a very small town. I was in Princeton,
[Guest]: New Jersey. So I was at Princeton University. And it's like a small, quaint picture postcard
[Guest]: like town and very much non-threatening in the way that Delhi can be overwhelming and intimidating.
[Guest]: So I also, you know, there's also a function of the fact that I'm much older. And so you feel
[Guest]: less insecure about yourself, you're less worried about who you are and what, where you fit in.
[Guest]: I had really a wonderful time in my PhD, of course, with all the anxiety that
[Guest]: doing something as lonely as a PhD can produce. You are choosing one topic to burrow down on
[Guest]: and deciding to become, or hoping to become an expert on it and produce some original research
[Guest]: on. And so sometimes it can feel like standing on the edge of a precipice and not knowing whether
[Guest]: your bridge across will appear or whether you can build it, or if you will just sort of take a step
[Guest]: and sink. But at the same time, at least for a couple of years in my PhD, you know, having done
[Guest]: at this point, quite a, frankly, embarrassing amount of master's degrees. I've done an MA
[Guest]: and an MPhil. And now as part of your PhD program, you are effectively also doing another MA.
[Guest]: I did feel like I could take it easy to some extent that I didn't have to, that I didn't have
[Guest]: to be quite so anxious, at least for the first two years. And so I, I remember kind of cutting
[Guest]: loose for the first semester, at least. I remember being amazed by the high speed internet, and then
[Guest]: just streaming every TV show that I wanted to watch. I remember going through several seasons
[Guest]: of Breaking Bad at an alarming rate. I remember it causing others to, also because I grew up in,
[Guest]: I studied before that in Delhi University and JNU, and it wasn't common for everyone necessarily to
[Guest]: study at the library. At JNU, many people did, but I just worked in my room. Whereas the culture
[Guest]: at my PhD was that most people just showed up at the library or a coffee shop and worked there.
[Guest]: And because I was missing from these spaces, people just thought that I wasn't doing any work.
[Guest]: But, you know, I was certainly doing less work than I probably should have at the very beginning.
[Guest]: But I quickly found that I rediscovered a joy in reading and in engaging with history outside of
[Guest]: Indian history. This is something that I think, unfortunately, in India, when you study history,
[Guest]: at least in the place that I went to, and when I was there, you just did Indian history of
[Guest]: different time periods and different specializations. And very rarely did you have
[Guest]: the opportunity to study other parts of the world, and certainly at the master's level and after I
[Guest]: did, but not at the range at which I was able to, during my PhD in my first two years, take courses
[Guest]: by experts in, you know, in early modern Europe or in modern Britain, or, you know, just things
[Guest]: that are far afield from my own core interest. And I found that quite horizon-opening and also
[Guest]: freeing, because it felt like I could just study it without worrying about, oh, I need to keep this
[Guest]: in mind for the future, that this is going to be related to my future project, or in some ways,
[Guest]: how is this related to my future research? It was just studying it for the sake of learning.
[Guest]: And that was very pleasurable. I also made, I quickly made a group of very close friends with
[Guest]: whom I'm close with till today. I also met my, the person who would go on to become my wife,
[Guest]: and also the mother of our child. And so I suppose I was particularly lucky in that I
[Guest]: made those connections. And I had that relationship throughout my time in my PhD. So I look back on my
[Guest]: PhD very fondly, though there is a lot, I am papering over a lot of just dread about, you know,
[Guest]: about trying to get a job. There is a, it's, there is a sort of jobs crisis in the humanities,
[Guest]: in that many, many more PhDs than there are jobs. And once you're at the end of a PhD,
[Guest]: in history, you really do feel like maybe there aren't many other options, right? So I had to get
[Guest]: off that train, you know, about seven to 10 years earlier, if I didn't need to make other choice.
[Guest]: And at that point, though, I am exaggerating, people go on to doing other things. But I felt
[Guest]: like by that point, not only was it the most obvious choice, but also, by that point, I was
[Guest]: quite convinced that that is what I'd really like doing. I felt that it was the most obvious
[Guest]: was my version of the good life that, or the nearest approximation that I could think of,
[Guest]: of a life in which I felt like I was doing something worthwhile, and doing something
[Guest]: that I enjoyed, and doing something that I could be decent at. And so that sort of trifecta,
[Guest]: I think, is hard to hit. And I mean, I'm sure, and there are days in which maybe I feel like
[Guest]: it's not the case. But overall, I am very glad with that, with that decision. But of course,
[Guest]: you know, landing a job was very, very stressful and anxiety inducing. But again, overall, I had
[Guest]: a very good time. And it's where I started thinking about this particular project that
[Guest]: led to this book. This book is based on my PhD at Princeton. And it's also where I started thinking
[Guest]: about the, because research I had been doing for a while, but I started thinking about the mechanics
[Guest]: of writing, and what writing, what kind of book do I want to write? How should it be written? How
[Guest]: can I improve my writing? These are things that I hadn't really given too much thought to. I just,
[Guest]: in some ways, I had a model of writing, a vision of what writing was, which maybe many people have,
[Guest]: which is that you just have certain innate abilities. And what you put on the page is a
[Guest]: reflection of that. And I suppose spurred by my disappointment at what my innate abilities seem
[Guest]: to be, I felt that I needed to try to improve on it. And I luckily seemed to find that actually
[Guest]: good writers and people who even teach writing, like yourself, believe that writing is a skill
[Guest]: that can be worked on and improved actually quite drastically. And so I just became much more,
[Guest]: I mean, I didn't do any formal course on it or anything, but I just became much more conscious
[Guest]: about writing and about my writing style and about how, whether, again, I leave it up to
[Guest]: readers to think if it has had any effect. But I certainly think that I improved as a writer
[Guest]: in that process. And I think that improving as a writer also improves your research and your
[Guest]: ability to translate that research and to be much more specific about the claims that you're making
[Guest]: and about the arguments that you want to advance. And so I found that actually very useful for my
[Guest]: research. And also I found it a way in which I could channel my energies towards, if I was not
[Guest]: feeling like I was making any progress on the research, I felt like, okay, I have this piece
[Guest]: of writing, how can I try to improve it? Can I try to make it more precise, less wordy,
[Guest]: less sort of flabby, less, you know, I mean, all the things that you try to do. And so, you know,
[Guest]: I just tried to find whatever piece of advice on writing I could find online. We were talking about
[Guest]: this earlier before we started recording, I looked up to these series of essays by John McPhee,
[Guest]: who's this legendary writer for the New Yorker, who's also taught generations of students on
[Guest]: writing. And I found that that attention to structure, to narrative, how to plot narratives,
[Guest]: that all of that, again, I don't know if it has worked, but it was new to me. I hadn't thought
[Guest]: about writing in that way, because I just had this view that you just have your level of skill,
[Guest]: and then that's all you can do. And so I found this, I found eye-opening, and I found it something
[Guest]: that I wanted to spend time working on. And since then, I felt that, you know, that's been,
[Guest]: I think it improved my research. And I think it improved what I was doing. And I realized that if
[Guest]: I'm going to be a historian, in some ways, my job, apart from teaching, that half my job is writing,
[Guest]: and I might as well try to improve on the way that I write. And so,
[Guest]: apart from the research, that took a fair bit of my time during my PhD.
[Amit Varma]: Were you also teaching during this time?
[Guest]: No, the graduate program that I was in actually had very generous funding, very generous scholarship,
[Guest]: and actually did not require you to teach, which perhaps has its downsides in that, you know,
[Guest]: you don't get a feel for what teaching is like, you don't get the experience. I chose, I volunteered
[Guest]: to be a teaching assistant for a professor for one semester. But even that's not like teaching
[Guest]: your own course. And so, actually, once I started my job, I had this moment when I,
[Guest]: just as I was about to go to my first class, this moment of panic, in which I wondered, you know,
[Guest]: I've chosen this career, and I've even got a job, but I actually have no idea how I am as a teacher,
[Guest]: what the experience of being a teacher is like, and A, whether I will be any good at it, and B,
[Guest]: whether I will enjoy it. And so, thankfully, both the answers were, I mean, whether I was good at
[Guest]: it, it seemed like I was at least competent. And that, again, like writing, you can improve. And
[Guest]: so I think that in my first semesters, I probably am a better teacher now than then, and I hope to
[Guest]: improve further every semester. You know, I tried to get better. But in terms of enjoying it, I
[Guest]: really did enjoy it. And I found that, actually, it was very nice to be able to pair teaching in a
[Guest]: classroom with doing research and with writing a book, because they move at different paces. The
[Guest]: research is, you know, moves often at snail's pace, takes years and years. Whereas the teaching
[Guest]: is something that you can get feedback on immediately, and you sort of get feedback,
[Guest]: even if they don't straight out tell you that, you know, you sucked. I mean, even if they don't say
[Guest]: that to you, you know, when a class has not gone well, you know, when you sort of miss the sweet
[Guest]: spot. On the other hand, you also know when a class really did feel like a good number of them
[Guest]: were really engaged, and that there's like a buzz in the room at the end of the class, some people
[Guest]: still want to talk about it, then you know that something has gone well. And that is nice to know
[Guest]: and that is nice to know that at the end of the week that, oh, I had two classes. And then, you know,
[Guest]: that one maybe didn't go so well, one went well, but at least you know, as opposed to the research
[Amit Varma]: in which it just takes so long. I'll come back to writing and teaching. But before that, I want to
[Amit Varma]: go back to our old subject of fitting in and this time in the context of the academic world in
[Amit Varma]: general, like one often hears about the academic world. And I've heard this from historians within
[Amit Varma]: academia, in fact, that there are these pressures that you have within that world to think in a
[Amit Varma]: particular way to do a particular kind of subject, you know, to look at the world with a particular
[Amit Varma]: kind of prism that in one sense, the act of doing history is not just doing history, it's it's also
[Amit Varma]: got an ideological tinge to it sometimes. It's also got other incentives mixed in because if
[Amit Varma]: you're a professional historians within the academic system, you have those typical pressures
[Amit Varma]: that you need to publish a certain number of papers and you need to publish them in a certain
[Amit Varma]: number of journals and a certain kind of work is expected from you. And maybe whatever you write
[Amit Varma]: has to have a new point of view on something. I mean, I know sociologists certainly feel that
[Amit Varma]: pressure that everything has to have, you know, a new theory that explains whatever.
[Amit Varma]: What were those pressures like that for you? Because I'm assuming that you're coming into
[Amit Varma]: history and this personal project of being a historian, driven by the pursuit of finding out
[Amit Varma]: more about the world, being able to understand it better, explain it better and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But there are also these other kind of pressures and incentives and often academics can seem like
[Amit Varma]: a big circle jerk where you're talking to each other constantly and your ideas aren't getting
[Amit Varma]: out there. Now you've clearly and we'll talk about it when we talk about the writing a bit more,
[Amit Varma]: made an effort to get past that because your book is, you know, and I mean it as a compliment,
[Amit Varma]: doesn't read like an academic book. It's got the rigor, it's got all the footnotes, but anyone can
[Amit Varma]: read it and enjoy it as just a story just unveiling itself. And I think McPhee wrote a famous book
[Amit Varma]: called Story as well. Tell me about all of this that, you know, being in academics, again, there
[Amit Varma]: is that pressure to fit in, which can change what you do in hidden, unseen ways, perhaps even to
[Amit Varma]: yourself. So what are your thoughts on that? And, you know, did this come up during your journey?
[Guest]: I think that it's a pressure that I'm sure many people feel and it's a pressure that I began to
[Guest]: feel in terms of publishing and professionalizing after the first two or three years of my PhD.
[Guest]: But in terms of intellectual conformity, I frankly did not feel that very much. I was really
[Guest]: fortunate to have a really, really very encouraging and wonderful academic supervisor who,
[Guest]: Jan Prakash, who's been a guest on your show as well, and who was, who sort of advised with a
[Guest]: very light touch in that I actually applied to my PhD program, claiming to do a very different
[Guest]: project. But within a year, I basically abandoned it. And there was no, no cost to it, right? I mean,
[Guest]: Jan would sort of joke about how I tricked him after coming into Princeton. But, you know,
[Guest]: but really, he encouraged that you try to explore what subject really appeals to you. And I think
[Guest]: being at the place I was did influence it because I started going from a place where I was doing
[Guest]: only Indian history, I went to a place where I was now taking courses in all kinds of other
[Guest]: geographic fields. And then I think that that influenced the ways in which I started thinking
[Guest]: about Indian history itself. I started thinking about, I was also a part of a group of people
[Guest]: at Princeton at the time who were looking at, who had interests in post-colonial India,
[Guest]: in independent India. Gyan himself, you know, had written Mumbai Fables, was writing Emergency
[Guest]: Chronicles amongst the students. There was Rotem Geva, who's writing a book that's just come out
[Guest]: on Delhi's partition, on the partition's effects on Delhi. Rohit Dey was there at a time a few years
[Guest]: senior to me, working on finishing up his research that then led to his book. Vinay Sitapati was also
[Guest]: there, working on a very different topic, but also on independent India. And so there were,
[Guest]: you know, several people there who were interested in this field that I had been interested in to
[Guest]: read on. But when I was an undergraduate or a graduate MA or an MPhil student in Delhi,
[Guest]: and this might be different now, but there was not a single course offered just on independent India.
[Guest]: And I found that, it's only when you look back to it, you realize, well, that's kind of strange that
[Guest]: we didn't have that. And in some ways, I mean, even like a book that, you know, many people
[Guest]: refer to as helping this sort of field grow, India after Gandhi, but that comes out, I think,
[Guest]: in 2008 or so. So I think that it's only in the last, you know, 15 to 20 years that, I mean,
[Guest]: well, I mean, of course, there has been work on independent India, but I mean, by historians,
[Guest]: after partition, I think historians tended to sort of stop there. And I think now historians are
[Guest]: doing a lot more work on independent India. And that seemed exciting to me. So I wanted to,
[Guest]: because I was interested in reading about independent India, I thought, why not work
[Guest]: on a subject like that? And that's what drew me to the topic that I did. And of course, I was
[Guest]: very fortunate to be in a place where that was encouraged. And as I said, my advisor, and I think
[Guest]: that the reason I mentioned the advisor is that in your PhD, the relationship you have with your
[Guest]: dissertation committee and your advisor can actually shape your experience a lot, both your
[Guest]: social experience, definitely your intellectual experience, and it can determine whether the
[Guest]: entire thing is a stressful period in your life, just overwhelmingly stressful period in your life,
[Guest]: in which you're constantly worried about your professor's favor, whether they have time for you,
[Guest]: time to read stuff, time to give you feedback, time to give right letters of recommendation,
[Guest]: and all these things. Whereas for me, I had just such a really pleasant experience in which I
[Guest]: had a very encouraging and supportive dissertation committee, intellectually, extremely vibrant
[Guest]: climate, and a place where I really felt like they had my back and that they would do what,
[Guest]: I mean, of course, in the end, it's up to you, but that they would do what they could to help
[Guest]: facilitate this research improve. And I recognize that that's not the case for everyone. And in the
[Guest]: cases where it's not, it can be very unpleasant and can feel even more lonely, because now,
[Guest]: and often, then you're also in a foreign country, you just feel alone, and you feel like nobody can
[Guest]: help you out of the situation, because you're in this power relationship. And the supervisor has,
[Guest]: in a sense, some power over you. So, so in many ways, I was, I was fortunate to, for where I went.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, Gyan has, of course, been on the show a few years ago to talk about the emergency,
[Amit Varma]: but I think that was less than an hour. So he, you know, he'd listened to this,
[Amit Varma]: and he'd be like, you spoke to me for less than an hour.
[Amit Varma]: Why are you bothering the kid? Let him go. It's been four hours, eight hours. So how did you get
[Guest]: Or he might criticize me for being so long winded.
[Amit Varma]: You're not, you're not being long winded at all. This is every moment of this has
[Amit Varma]: been so fascinating for me, and I'm sure for the listeners. And if you were on Twitter,
[Amit Varma]: they'd let you know that but sadly, that can't be the case. But so tell me about how you arrived at
[Amit Varma]: this specific subject. You know, I can understand Mahalanobis as a fascinating human being in itself,
[Amit Varma]: I can see the attraction there. But just this subject of planning and the role that it played
[Amit Varma]: in Indian public life, and you know, the different alleys that you've gone down in this book, like
[Amit Varma]: what drew you to it? And what eventually gave you the confidence that this is meaty enough to be a
[Guest]: thesis and to be a book and so on and so forth? Yeah, I mean, I suffer a crisis of confidence
[Guest]: even now about the book. So but but the way in which I arrived at the topic is that I,
[Guest]: I knew that I want to work on independent India, I was thinking about what topics I could address
[Guest]: that were another criterion I had is that I want to tell a national story again, because at the
[Guest]: time, that is what I was interested in, I want to read a story about, I was interested in stories
[Guest]: about nation building. And I wanted to understand this particular period of the 1950s and 60s,
[Guest]: to some extent, the 70s, because I think that a nation's founding is a seminal moment, right? It
[Guest]: is a unique moment. And that yes, every decade is different, but the nation's founding is specific,
[Guest]: and will not be replicated in some ways, and always will have knock on effects and ripples
[Guest]: through history into the present. And so I was, I was reading up on the period. And I,
[Guest]: I remember coming across references to plans and the five year plans. And when you'd see
[Guest]: documentaries about the time, there would be an obligatory reference to what is happening in the
[Guest]: five year plan. And then I started thinking that yes, even when I was in school, when I did
[Guest]: economics, we did study because you know, I mean, this is before the Planning Commission was
[Guest]: abolished. We did study the five year plan. And the second five year plan was especially mentioned
[Guest]: as being really important. And there the name of Mahalobis would come up. But I hadn't quite
[Guest]: understood why it became so popular. And I felt that there wasn't really an explanation for why
[Guest]: is it that planning became so central to the story of modern India that it became popular,
[Guest]: not just amongst economists and politicians, but that in films, they were talking about it in Bollywood
[Guest]: films, and in songs, they were they were they were referring to the Panchvarshya Yojana. In plays,
[Guest]: this was a common theme that came up in the background. When you talk about when they're
[Guest]: interviews with young people from the time 1956, they talk about the five year plan.
[Guest]: And then when you refer to, for example, if you looked at international press about India,
[Guest]: if you looked at, say, the Washington Post, the New York Times, or the Guardian or something,
[Guest]: there would inevitably be some reference to the five year plan and to planning,
[Guest]: and also planning and this democratic experiment with planning. So that is really what grabbed my
[Guest]: attention. One, the fact that planning was just ubiquitous in the language of planning was
[Guest]: ubiquitous across political parties. And just it was just part of the ether and just part of the
[Guest]: air that everybody breathed in the 1950s in India. But also, simultaneous to that, what
[Guest]: what hooked me was the the references to this Indian experiment in which it was trying to
[Guest]: combine liberal democracy with planning and the the alienness of it in which I read about it,
[Guest]: say, in the New York Times archival documents or in the Washington Post, or sometimes even in the
[Guest]: Times of India. That really got to me this because then I thought, oh, that's true that I hadn't
[Guest]: that's true that I hadn't thought about it that way. But that India was combining Soviet inspired
[Guest]: economic plans with liberal democratic political systems. And that to, for example, at least viewed
[Guest]: from the West, this was seen as a great experiment and one that could determine the future of Asia,
[Guest]: because of course, you know, to the north of India is both China and the Soviet Union,
[Guest]: both of which have command style planned economies, but they're not democracies. And so
[Guest]: whether this fusion could work in to some were seen as determinative of whether democracy of
[Guest]: a certain kind can work in recently decolonized poor nations across the world. And so then the
[Guest]: stakes of that seemed really grabbed me that it's this was not just important in India to India,
[Guest]: but also, it seemed important in global terms. And Indians were aware of it. It's why I think
[Guest]: it's sometimes I think, fed into Nehru's overblown, sometimes overblown rhetoric about planning,
[Guest]: this sense that India was perhaps shining a beacon for the rest of the third world for the rest of
[Guest]: the decolonizing world, because India, of course, is one of the earliest decolonizing nations.
[Guest]: And that this was a path, especially during the Cold War, when Soviet or command style economies
[Guest]: were seen as authority as they were politically, and that those were, in some ways, absolutely
[Guest]: incompatible with liberal capitalistic or market based economies and political structures, and that
[Guest]: India was trying in a sense, as I say in the book, it's sort of this arranged marriage between the
[Guest]: two. And that that was that that really appealed to me this this sense of the stakes being pretty
[Amit Varma]: high. And how important were both writing and teaching to clarifying your thoughts and
[Amit Varma]: sharpening your thoughts on the subject like, you know, from my point of view, a great way to learn
[Amit Varma]: something is a to write about it. Because if you force yourself to write clearly about a subject,
[Amit Varma]: you have to think better about it, you immediately figure out where are the gaps in your knowledge,
[Amit Varma]: where you need to sharpen your arguments, and so on and so forth. And equally the great way a great
[Amit Varma]: way to learn a subject is to actually prepare yourself to teach it. Because then you have to,
[Amit Varma]: you know, answer every basic question about it, you can't have any holes in your understanding
[Amit Varma]: of the subject as it were. So how important were those not just in the way that you approach this
[Amit Varma]: specific subject, but in sharpening your thinking as it were, and earlier before this, in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: one could say, you went through a different kind of pedagogic exercise and thinking when you did
[Amit Varma]: all your debating, because there again, you have to structure your thoughts and structure your
[Amit Varma]: arguments, and so on and so forth. So how important were all of these in just a way that you think
[Amit Varma]: about something in, you know, forming habits of the mind as it were, like what I find, for example,
[Amit Varma]: is that ever since I've like for note taking now earlier, when I would take notes, while researching
[Amit Varma]: something, I just, I'd have done pages and pages of Microsoft Word, and it would all be kind of
[Amit Varma]: linear and I can move things about but it's one mess. Now I use Rome research, which uses the
[Amit Varma]: old German system of Zettelkasten, where you have nested entries. And I just find that sometimes
[Amit Varma]: I'm thinking more clearly about something, because to put things into categories and subcategories,
[Amit Varma]: and then to cross link them, you know, just become so much easier. So tell me a little bit
[Amit Varma]: about this. Because whenever you start thinking about a subject, your head is a muddle of thoughts
[Amit Varma]: about it. There's a lot of information coming in. And how do you organize that? How do you break it
[Amit Varma]: up into bits, break it up into categories, start organizing it. And I guess all of this, you know,
[Amit Varma]: from note taking to writing to teaching, all of this is a way of sort of thinking, organizing it
[Amit Varma]: and thinking about it in a particular way. So what's your journey with that?
[Guest]: I think that there are two aspects to it. One is the logistical challenges. And the second is just
[Guest]: the intellectual challenge of producing a cogent argument. In terms of the logistics for historians,
[Guest]: especially, I mean, for most historians, we go to archives, and the archives can be
[Guest]: institutional archives, it could be finding the scripts of some of the plays that I talk about,
[Guest]: or, you know, watching the movies from the 1950s that I analyze, watching documentaries
[Guest]: from the Films Division of India that I analyze. But a lot of it is was for me, coming back to
[Guest]: Delhi, spending months on end at the National Archives of India, and at the Nehru Memorial
[Guest]: Museum and Library, where a lot of the private papers of lots of figures, including Savarkar,
[Guest]: for example, it's not just Nehruvian figures are held at that institutional collection. And so
[Guest]: it was just many months of spending days at the archives, first just collecting the material,
[Guest]: then at Calcutta, going to the P.C. Mahalanobis Memorial Museum, which is on the Institute
[Guest]: campus. I spent some time in Bombay getting some of the Films Division documentaries,
[Guest]: which took a while and necessitated me going to Bombay. And then a few months after that,
[Guest]: they just put all of it on YouTube, which made me feel like a bit of a fool.
[Guest]: But the challenge, in some ways, the archive is a challenge, because you can have days,
[Guest]: if not weeks, when you just go and you come up with nothing, nothing that is of interest to you,
[Guest]: nothing that seems really relevant to your topic. And so that can be one kind of
[Guest]: challenge and of anxiety about, you know, have I picked a good topic? Have I picked a topic that
[Guest]: actually doesn't have very much on it? Then there's the fact that as I write in the book,
[Guest]: I discovered the Planning Commission records seem to be kind of missing. And as another scholar
[Guest]: said, it seems like having, you know, tried using contacts at ministries, etc., that scholar came
[Guest]: to the conclusion, Vivek Chiba, that some clerk at some point just decided to get rid of these
[Guest]: documents because it doesn't fit into one of the classifications that continued from the colonial
[Guest]: period of, you know, Ministry of Finance, Home Ministry, etc. It's this kind of interstitial
[Guest]: body that might have fallen through the cracks for that reason. And so that produced, you know,
[Guest]: that got me even more worried. But once you start finding some documents, that also...
[Guest]: So I think that a perception that people sometimes have about archival research is that you know what
[Guest]: you want to argue, and you look for the documents that prove that. Instead, at least in my case,
[Guest]: and I think in the case of most historians, is that you know the broad field that you want to
[Guest]: research, but the archive often surprises you. And for example, I did not know that I'll be writing
[Guest]: about Mahalanobis at all. I thought that he might play a small role because he was involved with the
[Guest]: second five-year plan, but I did not think that the Indian Statistical Institute, or statistics,
[Guest]: or computers would be one half of the book. And that was directed by what I found in the archives,
[Guest]: what captured my attention at that time, and what I found really arresting in the archives in Delhi
[Guest]: and in Calcutta. But once you sort of amass all these photocopies, there is then the challenge
[Guest]: of you to take all these, you know, thousands of pages back to the U.S., and then there's a worry
[Guest]: about you hear all these amongst historians. There's always somebody who's heard some
[Guest]: horror story about somebody who spent months or a year collecting all the stuff, and then
[Guest]: there was the monsoons, and all of it just got soaked. Or it got lost, you know, somebody was
[Guest]: traveling in an auto, and they left it there, and they lost their entire years of research.
[Guest]: And it's true that once you lose it, there is no substitute for spending again another few months
[Guest]: getting it, because the archives in India, I should say, don't allow you to take photographs.
[Guest]: So you cannot take photographs of these documents. So you have to get the archive to photocopy it
[Guest]: for you or to scan it for you. But you can take photographs of that.
[Guest]: Yes, you can take. So at that time, also, I did not have a good enough camera phone,
[Guest]: and it was so many documents that I just, you know, went to Nehru place and told them to scan
[Guest]: the entire thing. So I had a backup. So there are all these concerns about, because then you get so
[Guest]: possessive about these documents, you carry it only on carry-on luggage, not in your check-in
[Guest]: luggage, because I can lose all my clothes, but I cannot lose these documents, which is what I
[Guest]: actually intend to do even when I go back to the US this time, which I'm already making plans for
[Guest]: two months down the line about where I will carry these documents, so they are never more than five
[Guest]: feet away from me. But then the challenge when you come back is logistical about like, what do you
[Guest]: just do with thousands of pages, right? You have to have some method of going through it, of then
[Guest]: categorizing these different thoughts. And unfortunately, for me, in my PhD, I just I
[Guest]: wasn't, I'm not a very organized thinker. And I'm not a very organized person in general.
[Guest]: But I can with archival stuff, then that's perhaps the only thing going in my favor is that I can get
[Guest]: obsessive about these documents. And so I would just go on these stairs in which I would just,
[Guest]: just be inhaling these documents over long periods. And then I would not be able to let
[Guest]: the documents go. So if I was at the gym, or walking, taking the half an hour walk home,
[Guest]: I would be on my phone on a note app, writing down ideas as they came to me, right, I'd sometimes
[Guest]: have like sentences that came to me or like little garbled versions of arguments that I could make.
[Guest]: And I just write them all down, because you don't know when they'll come to you. And like you said,
[Guest]: it's only when you write them down, later on, you look at and you think, well, 80% of that is
[Guest]: garbage, but at least the 20% there, that's actually I can work with. And so I'd have notes
[Guest]: on my phone on my laptop. But then you decide that, okay, I need to organize these vast amount of
[Guest]: paper into bite sized portions. So for example, with me, the first chapter I wrote was about the
[Guest]: computer, because that was an easy thing to identify in the archive. Almost all of it came
[Guest]: from the Calcutta archive. So I knew that it was a discrete set of papers. And I was like, okay,
[Guest]: I can spend some time on this, and maybe produce something on this. Because if I just looked at all
[Guest]: the documents all the time, I'll never get down to writing. It also helped that it had this really,
[Guest]: I came across purely by chance, this online archive of this man called Morton Nadler,
[Guest]: that was then on the Virginia Tech server, which has since been taken down. So I think on the one
[Guest]: year that was up, I managed to get access to it. And it was basically the memoirs of a man named
[Guest]: Morton Nadler, who was this young Jewish kid in Brooklyn, who was from very early on had become
[Guest]: a communist, became a member of the Communist Party of the United States in the 1930s,
[Guest]: had aroused the suspicion of the American Army, the FBI and the CIA, was fired from a job in
[Guest]: Chicago because of his communist sympathies, and then decided to lie to his parents and say that
[Guest]: he's going to do a PhD at the Sorbonne in Paris. And then instead, he took a ship to Paris and then
[Guest]: took a flight to Prague and Czechoslovakia, because it was in the Soviet Union, and he wanted
[Guest]: to be part of building Soviet communism. And so when I'm reading this stuff, and then I saw some
[Guest]: reference to Calcutta and the ISI, and I knew, okay, so there's something here that's really
[Guest]: exciting. And the story happens that Nadler, once he's in Prague, starts working on sort of
[Guest]: Soviet computers there, but then gets very disillusioned with the Soviet Union and communism,
[Guest]: because he finds out that the American government revokes his citizenship because they think he's a
[Guest]: deserter, and it's treasonous. But the Czechoslovakian government also suspects that
[Guest]: he might be a double agent who's been planted by the American government, and that this entire
[Guest]: thing of the embassy cancelling his passport is just a ruse, so that he can get embedded into the
[Guest]: Soviet government. I mean, it's this real Cold War intrigue stuff, right? But then they decide,
[Guest]: okay, maybe we can trust him. So they recruit him as a spy to spy on his family back in America.
[Guest]: But because nobody really trusts people in these situations, they have their own spy tailed by
[Guest]: another spy. And so they have his phone tapped. He suspects that one of his lovers, who's one of
[Guest]: his many extramarital affairs, is also a planted Soviet spy. And then in the end, the reason that
[Guest]: this story is relevant to me is because he decides he gets so paranoid about being in Prague and gets
[Guest]: sick of this overbearing Soviet state that he decides he needs to leave. But where does he go?
[Guest]: He can't go back to America because they revoked his citizenship, and he's seen as a communist.
[Guest]: And then somebody tells him that you need to go to a non-aligned country. And it so happens that
[Guest]: Mahalanobis, the professor, shows up in Prague around that time. And Morten Nadler makes contact
[Guest]: with the third secretary of the Indian embassy there and gets in touch with Mahalanobis and says,
[Guest]: you know, I can come and work for a few years on India's first computers, because I have all this
[Guest]: technical knowledge. And in his mind, he's thinking doing that will be like a calling off period,
[Guest]: such that eventually I can go back to America. And so once I found that story, and once I had
[Guest]: this really exciting archival material about how Mahalanobis brings India its first computers,
[Guest]: I knew that, you know, maybe I have a chapter there, maybe have an article there. So, you know,
[Guest]: as you can probably gather, it's quite all over the place, and it's not very organized, but
[Amit Varma]: that's how it came together for me. The Morten Nadler story is great. And you threw in a little
[Amit Varma]: bit about how he named his daughter Maya after Mao, which is a little bizarre. Why didn't he
[Amit Varma]: just call her Mao? But, and also that bit about how you had spies who were being spied upon by
[Amit Varma]: other spies, because, you know, it's so just a fascinating, you know, story of the guy. So how
[Amit Varma]: did you do knowledge management in the sense you've got all these papers, you've had them
[Amit Varma]: scanned at Nehru Place? Yeah. So now you have the scans, but you don't have the actual text.
[Amit Varma]: So how do you know I had both, I took both. Oh, you took both, you had the text as well.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. Like when they scanned it, they had a software that turned it into text? No,
[Guest]: so I had the photocopies from the National Archive, which I got scanned. And so I have
[Guest]: these photocopies, which I got spiral bound, because I was like, I also needed to be, you
[Guest]: know, easily go through it. And I don't like lose papers flying around. So, so yes, I had two copies
[Amit Varma]: of almost all the documents from the National Archive. But what I mean by text is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you can't copy paste onto the document that you're writing, you have to actually type stuff
[Amit Varma]: out yourself and all of that. So how did it start taking concrete shape in terms of
[Amit Varma]: Do you use specific software, software for knowledge management? Or do you? I mean,
[Guest]: how do you know? I don't I know many people who do. I don't I am, I suppose, quite neanderthal
[Guest]: in these things. I, I just had these documents, and I would just spend a lot of time going through
[Guest]: all the documents, and trying to organize them in my head and organize them by themes. And yeah,
[Guest]: you can't cut and paste, there's no OCR either. And so you just need to, you know, paginate all
[Guest]: the papers and and then make notes for yourself saying if I'm building this argument, page number
[Guest]: 81 from this document, page number 236 from this document, like all these things will help in making
[Guest]: that argument. And so that, I suppose, was the most rudimentary knowledge management system I
[Guest]: have. Yes, but I know that to you, it must sound like, you know, knocking two stones, flint stones
[Guest]: of flint against each other to make fire, when we have so many more advanced ways. It's what I've
[Amit Varma]: done all my life. And not managed to make much fire. And who were your like, when you were
[Amit Varma]: thinking about what the book would read, like, did you have any writing models that I want to write
[Amit Varma]: a book like this? You know, you've mentioned, you know, wanting to get away from the turgid
[Amit Varma]: academic writing and reaching a bigger audience and all that you mentioned that you did a lot of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, reading of writing advice to kind of get there. And by the way, I totally agree with
[Amit Varma]: you like one point I feel strongly about and I tell all my writing students is that there may be
[Amit Varma]: other domains where you need some natural talent. Like if you're a musician, or if you're a batsman,
[Amit Varma]: you need hand eye coordination. If you're a fast bowler, you need fast twitch muscles,
[Amit Varma]: you do not need inherent talent for writing, anyone can learn to write well, right. And I'm at
[Amit Varma]: pains to emphasize this, because people will often come in saying that I find writing so hard, and
[Amit Varma]: maybe it's just not in me. And the point is, everyone finds writing hard, right? You just
[Amit Varma]: have to work at it and you, you kind of get better. But that aside aside, you know, were there
[Amit Varma]: any historians or historical books that you then looked at and said, My God, this person does it
[Amit Varma]: really well, I want to write like her. And, you know, and how consciously did how aware did you
[Amit Varma]: then become of matters of the craft? How mindfully did you read for that as well when you were
[Guest]: reading? Yeah, I mean, about academic pros, I think that, to me, I don't think that there is
[Guest]: necessarily a one size fits all, I think that academic pros can sometimes seem turgid. And
[Guest]: it's because some of it is meant for an academic audience, right, that there are, there are
[Guest]: communities in every field of specialization. And just like that, in history, sometimes certain
[Guest]: arguments need need for you to refer to other theories, etc, which aren't immediately accessible
[Guest]: to just the average person, right, not accessible in that it's too smart for them, but that they
[Guest]: need to spend time learning those theories in order to be able to understand this argument. So
[Guest]: I don't think that every history book necessarily needs to be written in the same manner. But
[Guest]: I thought that I, I had a argument and narrative that lended itself to if I tried hard, to
[Guest]: being able to communicate in a way that that most people should that everyone should be able
[Guest]: to understand. And so that's why and that's, that was something that I want to do with this book.
[Guest]: And so the I don't know if I had any specific models, but I knew that, for example, that there
[Guest]: were, for example, that the book India after Gandhi by Ramchandra Guha, that that sort of
[Guest]: was one of the first books that was doing a sort of survey of independent India. And so I'd say
[Guest]: that many of the books that are monographs that are written now about independent India, many of
[Guest]: those cite that book, because that book really did sort of open a field and many other books came in
[Guest]: its wake. And so that was a model, though, in that Ram Guha, and I think that he'd be the first to
[Guest]: admit it was not a deep dive on any one subject, right? Its aim was, in a sense, much more ambitious,
[Guest]: which is to capture all of independent India, which is why it's gone into like repeat editions,
[Guest]: because independent India's history keeps evolving as well. Whereas I was doing a deep dive,
[Guest]: partly because for a PhD, you have to provide original research on one particular subject,
[Guest]: one particular sort of something that you hone in on. And so while in terms of
[Guest]: in terms of the audience, like a book like India after Gandhi gave me a sense that,
[Guest]: oh, actually, there are people outside of academia who seem to want to know things about
[Guest]: Indian history and are willing to read about it, right? So that book was an eye-opener in that it
[Guest]: gave me a sense of how much more history can and should be written about independent India,
[Guest]: and also that there is a readership for it in India. In terms of writing style itself,
[Guest]: I admire the work of Gyan Prakash, who does academic history, but that his writing styles are
[Guest]: supple in that he's able to move between writing for an academic audience and writing for an
[Guest]: audience that is academic and non-academic as well. And so I think that his earliest book
[Guest]: was much more academic, and his first two books were much more academic than his latter two books,
[Guest]: such as Mumbai Fables and Emergency Chronicles. And so I found that those were books that
[Guest]: managed to be academically rigorous, engaging with scholarship and with a lot of archival material,
[Guest]: but at the same time was written in a way that people outside the academy could read and understand
[Guest]: and engage with. Apart from that, and I'm just sort of choosing people in my immediate milieu
[Guest]: at Princeton, Linda Colley is another historian, a historian of Britain, who also is a remarkable
[Guest]: writer, just sweeping narratives, great textual detail, maybe coming from this British narrative
[Guest]: history tradition that is very rich, and at the same time is an extremely well-respected historian
[Guest]: whose scholarship is impeccable, but is able to write in this way that allowed for even somebody
[Guest]: who's not interested necessarily in British history to read it and be sort of taken up by
[Guest]: the narrative. So those are the two that come to mind in terms of writing style of trying to bridge
[Guest]: this gap. But otherwise, in terms of the history itself, I mean, there are like works of history
[Guest]: like Shahid Amin, his like Gandhi as Mahatma, his essay that I now teach in my undergraduate
[Guest]: classes on history, which is sort of a real model of how to do really fine-grained historical
[Guest]: analysis of like a very small event. This entire essay is based on a one-day visit by Gandhi to
[Guest]: Gorakhpur, to a village in Gorakhpur. But he uses that one event and all of the press reports
[Guest]: generated by it, all the rumors that it was generated by it to come up with this portrait
[Guest]: of Gandhi that's very different from the portrait that we had of Gandhi from before, of Gandhi and
[Guest]: about how the meanings of Gandhi were actually much vaster than Gandhi himself had control over,
[Guest]: that people imbued meanings onto him. And so those are some of the models of research that I have
[Guest]: found in terms of both method and in terms of writing to be models. But I mean, I really feel
[Guest]: bad just singling these three out, because I had a remarkable slate of teachers from Delhi
[Guest]: University and in JNU. I mean, Dilip Menon, Shahid Amin, Sunil Kumar, then at JNU, I had Tanika
[Guest]: Sarkar, Niladri Bhattacharya, Janaki Nair. I mean, all people who in different ways are able to
[Guest]: combine writing for a public, and these are people who have written op-eds, etc, and are able to do
[Guest]: that, but also write academic works that are meant to advance the field and advance original research
[Guest]: as well. So I think I try to take inspiration from them. So let's talk about the book. And for me,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the part of the book which really came alive for me, and therefore brought the whole book
[Amit Varma]: alive for me, was really reading a bit more about Mahalanobis, who is just such an incredibly
[Amit Varma]: fascinating character. But before we start talking about Mahalanobis itself, the thought kind of
[Amit Varma]: struck me on how so much that happened was contingent on certain individuals. If Mahalanobis
[Amit Varma]: did not exist, for example, if he got typhoid at the age of two and something unfortunate happened,
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth, you could argue that a certain part of the history of independent
[Amit Varma]: India might have been different. And that certainly holds true much more powerfully for
[Amit Varma]: someone like Nehru, for example, right? As a historian, what do you think of the great man
[Amit Varma]: theory of history? You know, and just for my listeners who may not be familiar with it,
[Amit Varma]: Thomas Carlyle came up with this great man theory of history, which speaks about how
[Amit Varma]: history is shaped by and of course, it's a gender term, but history is shaped by people who come
[Amit Varma]: and they do remarkable things. And without them, history would have been different. And the
[Amit Varma]: counterpoint to that is that no, there are broad currents in history. And the individuals who are
[Amit Varma]: there just happen to be like right time, right place instruments for those currents. But otherwise,
[Amit Varma]: they don't matter so much. But really looking at Indian history, it seems that these accidents of
[Amit Varma]: fate sometimes embodied in the shape of a person can make a huge amount of difference. Like if
[Amit Varma]: Nehru wasn't our first Prime Minister, say if it was Patel, for example, we would have gone in very
[Amit Varma]: different directions, maybe not in the same directions that today's ruling party imagines,
[Amit Varma]: but it would have been somewhat different across various different dimensions. Similarly,
[Amit Varma]: Mahalanobis was not there, you know, things could have worked out really differently. And who knows,
[Amit Varma]: you may not even have had a book. So what's your sense of, you know, the importance of
[Amit Varma]: individuals one and the importance of accident, circumstance?
[Guest]: Yeah, this is an eternal question in history, the interplay between human agency and structural
[Guest]: forces. And one way to think about this, the debate is between this sort of Carlisle position
[Guest]: about the great man theory and a very Marxist position that believes in materialism and
[Guest]: ultimately structural forces determine everything, no single individual, not even Karl Marx,
[Guest]: determines history. I mean, some might argue that actually Karl Marx himself is a refutation
[Guest]: of that explanation. I think that I don't have any dogmatic belief in either. I think that it is. And
[Guest]: I think that that's true of most historians that, at least the historians, most historians that I
[Guest]: know of, believe that it's an interplay of the two. And the choice you have to make as a historian
[Guest]: is assessing how much of each. And so in the first half of my book as well, I hope it comes across,
[Guest]: but I'm also trying to walk this fine line between saying that, yes, Mahalanobis was an
[Guest]: extremely influential individual by the force of his personality, by the influence he had,
[Guest]: by this way he almost single-handedly is the person associated with national statistics in India
[Guest]: and the Indian Statistical Institute. But at the same time, I'm also making a structural argument,
[Guest]: which is to say that the reason that statistics becomes important, yes,
[Guest]: Mahalanobis might have been a great statistician, but why does he become an economic planner?
[Guest]: The reason and the structural argument I offer is that the reason he becomes an economic planner
[Guest]: is because India has adopted centralized planning. Centralized planning requires these masses of data
[Guest]: and it's in that context that somebody so intimately involved with national statistics
[Guest]: comes to be seen as maybe a suitable person to pick as a planner. Because otherwise it's not
[Guest]: natural for a professor of physics who's turned a statistician to become the most influential
[Guest]: policymaker in the country in economics. And so what I'm trying to do is to tie together
[Guest]: both the structural argument, saying that it is the structural force about the rise of planning
[Guest]: states, such as in India and the Soviet Union and China, that opens up a field under this
[Guest]: Nehruvian government for technocrats like Mahalanobis to strut on the stage, right? For
[Guest]: them to have this overweening influence is possible because of the structure. Now, once you have this
[Guest]: broad structure and the stage set, then yes, the individual there determines what path it might
[Guest]: take. And so yes, there is individual agency and that matters a hell of a lot. But I do think that
[Guest]: individuals operate, all of us operate within certain structures, right? And no individual
[Guest]: entirely overcomes a structure, right? So even with Nehru, he is a part of a Congress elite that
[Guest]: is overwhelmingly, you know, a lot of them are foreign educated, a lot of them are educated at
[Guest]: Cambridge, a lot of them are lawyers. Nehru's own father is a lawyer and a member of the Congress
[Guest]: party. And so you think, well, it's not then so atypical that Nehru becomes a leader of this
[Guest]: party, right? In some ways, maybe Gandhi is more atypical, even though he is also a foreign
[Guest]: educated lawyer as well. And so I think that when you start looking into any individual deep enough,
[Guest]: you start seeing patterns. And so I think that belies sometimes Carlisle's reification of the
[Guest]: great man. And I think that it's important to give individuals their agency, because otherwise,
[Guest]: you have these sort of stultifying narratives in which it seems like almost, well, if you just
[Guest]: figure out all the structures, you could just predict the future as well. So I think it's a
[Guest]: balance between identifying the structural forces, but within that seeing where and how contingency
[Guest]: plays a role, right? That if, for example, so and so was born later or had died earlier,
[Guest]: what would have happened? So if the counterfactual, though historians don't like doing
[Guest]: counterfactuals, because and that's why we do not do counterfactuals, because we do not have
[Guest]: any evidence to predict. But the structural forces argument would suggest that even if Nehru, you
[Guest]: know, died of typhoid when he was very young, statistics would have still played a very
[Guest]: important role if India had chosen centralized planning. Now, India might not have chosen the
[Guest]: route of sample serving. India might not have had a statistician who became the economic planner.
[Guest]: But statistics would have remained important, because as I tried to show through the book,
[Guest]: it's not just Malinobis who's talking about statistics, lots of people recognize the
[Guest]: importance of statistics. So somebody else might have played not the same role that Malinobis did,
[Guest]: but a different role. But statistics would have been important regardless, I think.
[Amit Varma]: I think along with these two forces of human agency and structural forces,
[Amit Varma]: I think there will be, you know, a third force that I might posit is just happenstance,
[Amit Varma]: just accident, you know, if Nehru's mom gets a headache, nine months before Nehru is born,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the course of history could be very different, we might not even have centralized
[Amit Varma]: planning. And or when Nehru and Malinobis meet for the first time, for example, possibly in Tagore's
[Amit Varma]: house, or possibly when Tagore was staying with Malinobis, as you point out, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and they don't get along well, for some reason, Malinobis has missed his breakfast, and he's
[Amit Varma]: rude to Nehru, you know, little things can just turn history around. But I buy your point that
[Amit Varma]: it's a complex interplay of all of these things. And it really doesn't matter what you want to,
[Amit Varma]: you know, necessarily privilege over the other all of these sort of matter. Now, I love your
[Amit Varma]: little pen portraits of all the people here that you've kind of created and about Malinobis,
[Amit Varma]: I'll read this bit out, for example, quote, you write, tall, prominently nose, stern of gaze,
[Amit Varma]: vast of brow, with hair severely parted and slicked flat by coconut oil. Malinobis looked
[Amit Varma]: the part of a serious man. He was born into a family that belonged to Bengal's landed elite,
[Amit Varma]: and his early milieu was that of intellectual inquiry and religious reform in turn of the
[Amit Varma]: century Calcutta. He grew up to be a prim workaholic, seemingly immune to frivolity,
[Amit Varma]: and usually found day and night stooping over his calculations. As a friend of nearly half a century
[Amit Varma]: corroborated, he had no time for small talk and little capacity to compromise with unreason.
[Amit Varma]: Even a smile, tight lipped and partial to the right cheek could seem a grudging concession.
[Amit Varma]: Malinobis appeared to make a virtue of withholding expressions of affection,
[Amit Varma]: believing it his duty to conceal it, except to pets, which included dogs, cats and cows,
[Amit Varma]: top quote. Now, I imagine that in the process of, you know, delving into the life of a person like
[Amit Varma]: this, there is that moment where the figure just becomes three dimensional, where you get that
[Amit Varma]: inside view of not just all the biographical details and the descriptive details about the
[Amit Varma]: person, but about their motivations about their insecurities about the vulnerability, so on and so
[Amit Varma]: forth. So tell me about that. You know, was there a similar process that played out with Malinobis?
[Amit Varma]: You know, I think you said you had access to his papers or his letters or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: What did those reveal to you about him? And how is it then? How does it play out in that process
[Amit Varma]: that at first, you are looking into historical events, but then as you go deeper and deeper into a person,
[Amit Varma]: at some level, there is a greater connection, there might even be an emotional involvement,
[Amit Varma]: maybe you start rooting for the guy, maybe, you know, the more vulnerable you find him,
[Amit Varma]: the more flawed you find him, perhaps the closer you feel to him. So what is that process like of
[Amit Varma]: writing something like this, actually reading personal letters written to and by him? You know,
[Guest]: what was all of that like? I think that that is part of the role of a historian, which is to
[Guest]: judge and to recognize these different scales at which you're operating, right? You're operating
[Guest]: at, so in my book, I'm operating at the level of the national, sometimes even the international.
[Guest]: And then within the national to some important individuals, then say at the planning commission,
[Guest]: and then you get down to the nitty gritty and the texture of just one person's letters to say his
[Guest]: wife, or maybe to the prime minister, or to the finance minister. And, and you're right that there
[Guest]: is a way in which, I mean, unless the person is just absolutely repulsive, and like reveals
[Guest]: themselves to be an awful human being. But that you when you're reading personal correspondence,
[Guest]: like you have an emotional response, right? You're a human being, you're reading the writings of
[Guest]: somebody else, and in which they're writing it, not knowing that, you know, 70 years later,
[Guest]: somebody else is going to read it and be analyzing it, you know, so it has, you know, details about,
[Guest]: you know, today, my stomach was not good, you know, how, how your children, they're all these
[Guest]: are small details that, you know, I know about the hair slick flock by coconut oil, because
[Guest]: not in the letter in which I was reading about the rest of his personality traits, but
[Guest]: in some other letter, I saw a letter from him from abroad to Pitambar Pant saying, you know,
[Guest]: when you come, can you please bring a coconut oil for me, right? So you, you get these little
[Guest]: details that that humanize the individual. But I think the risk is also that you might start
[Guest]: rooting for them, as you said, you might start being seduced by the personality. And I think
[Guest]: that that's when hopefully your training kicks in, you realize that what you're trying to do is not
[Guest]: you're trying to present the person as he was, and not necessarily make a case for the person.
[Guest]: And so I tried to to convey only that which I thought could be corroborated in some way. So
[Guest]: the hair oil, even that I was trying to make sure that I had something that gave me a reasonable
[Guest]: enough interpretation to say that, well, it's probably that he usually used, you know, coconut
[Guest]: oil. When I talked about the fact that he looked the part of a serious man, that is a sense that
[Guest]: I just got from reading decades of his correspondence, right? He was all there was
[Guest]: never a joke, there is always unremittingly serious, right, and high minded and talking about
[Guest]: high stakes, this being important for the country. And, again, it is corroborated by what his friends
[Guest]: said about him, right, that he is, you know, very, very serious, unsmiling, unable to compromise
[Guest]: the unreason was usually sort of, you know, people who talk about how a conversation with
[Guest]: Mahalanobis was usually a monologue. So when I make even those comments there, I try to keep it
[Guest]: rooted in what I know from the sources as well. And so I knew that if I just mirrored Mahalanobis'
[Guest]: writings, I would basically be writing a pain and an ode to planning, I would be writing about how
[Guest]: great planning is, how it would do all these miraculous things. But that's not what I want
[Guest]: to do. I mean, not do I want to knock planning necessarily, I just want to present, understand
[Guest]: why planning became so central to India. And so using Mahalanobis as the vehicle for that
[Guest]: allowed me to show an aspect of planning that's not about, you know, whether the growth rates
[Guest]: were missed or not, but instead about the growth of India's data infrastructure, about its data
[Guest]: capacities through somebody like Mahalanobis and the Indian Statistical Institute, both of whom
[Guest]: actually have a huge influence even today, you know, through the sample surveys, through the
[Guest]: national sample survey, all of which India uses still today. And so there is this way in which
[Guest]: you try to measure the evidence, you try to measure what they say in their letter, try to see
[Guest]: if it's corroborated by other people. And if you are using something that is affective or emotive,
[Guest]: affective or emotive from the letters, you make it clear to the reader that you're quoting them,
[Guest]: that this is not your view, but you are quoting how Mahalanobis felt at that moment. And that
[Guest]: this is not me, the author who's conveying it. So I think that there is, you have to exercise
[Guest]: judgment. And I think that that's the only way to go about it. I think that any biographer also has
[Guest]: to do it. But I think that the best histories managed to do that well, which is to convey
[Guest]: a sense of empathy, but not necessarily sympathy with the subject that you empathize with this
[Guest]: person in order to make them come alive on the page. But you do not sympathize with their political
[Guest]: positions or their economic recommendations. So you know, before India becomes independent,
[Amit Varma]: before planning happens, there are sort of two fascinating narratives, which are kind of weaving
[Amit Varma]: in and out of each other which are going on. One is Mahalanobis giving up physics falling in love
[Amit Varma]: with stats, you know, forming the Indian Statistical Institute, and some of the pioneering
[Amit Varma]: work he did there, which even if planning had never happened, you'd still recognize it as
[Amit Varma]: absolutely pioneering work just you know, what happened in the 40s before that. So that's one
[Amit Varma]: really interesting thread that's happening. The other thread that's happening at the same time
[Amit Varma]: is of our early leaders, including Nehru, recognizing the importance of planning like
[Amit Varma]: you point out how, you know, in 1938, when Subhash Chandra Bose is President of the Congress,
[Amit Varma]: he says that, hey, there has to be we have to plan, there has to be a planning commission,
[Amit Varma]: planning committee, rather, I think National Planning Committee, it was called. And he asked
[Amit Varma]: Nehru to be head of the National Planning Committee, and Nehru is head of it. And now
[Amit Varma]: Nehru is thinking seriously about planning, because he's part of that committee. So it's,
[Amit Varma]: you know, come up against circumstances kind of bringing him there. And as he's thinking about it,
[Amit Varma]: he, you know, these two threads kind of come together, you know, you pointed out about how
[Amit Varma]: he's met Mahalanobis socially, randomly, and how he meets him in 1939, where he goes to Calcutta to
[Amit Varma]: meet Tagore, because he wants permission from Tagore for Jana Gana Mana to be national anthem,
[Amit Varma]: if it's you know, if and when we get independence, and Tagore happens to be staying at Mahalanobis'
[Amit Varma]: place, because you know, family, friends and all that. And that's where he meets Mahalanobis,
[Amit Varma]: chat together. Next year, 1940, Mahalanobis comes over, meets him in Anand Bhavan, stays with him
[Amit Varma]: over there. They're kind of becoming friends. And then over the years, this is sort of
[Amit Varma]: intertwining. So tell me about sort of these two different narratives, like one is what's happening
[Amit Varma]: in the world of statistics, like I had an episode with the data journalist Pramit Bhattacharya,
[Amit Varma]: and Pramit made a similar point, that look what happened in India in the starting from the 30s,
[Amit Varma]: but 40s, 50s, was absolutely mind blowing, it would be were trendsetters for the whole world
[Amit Varma]: in a sense. And this is a time before data is really advanced. It's only around the time of
[Amit Varma]: the Second World War, you know, in the 30s, really, that the import that the need for a GDP
[Amit Varma]: is felt before that you don't have a national measure at all. And I've had an entire episode
[Amit Varma]: on the GDP, of course, and conceptually, there are big flaws and whatever. But that's a decade
[Amit Varma]: when the world is coming to terms with the need for something like this, statistics, or a lot of
[Amit Varma]: the things that we take for granted in terms of studies, statistics don't exist, or at a very
[Amit Varma]: primitive stage. And here is this man, Mahalanobis, who is, you know, whatever opponents of planning
[Amit Varma]: may think of him today, and certainly, you know, there is a lot to be said. But in terms of that
[Amit Varma]: early statistical work, we are absolute pioneers. And at the same time, there is a nation about to
[Amit Varma]: be formed. And, you know, and you have those leaders like Nehru, saying that, hey, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the way out of our poverty, the way out of our colonial past is planning. And for planning,
[Amit Varma]: we need data. And therefore, statistics is important. And hey, I happen to know this
[Amit Varma]: cool guy, he smiles only from the right side of his face, he's kind of taciturn, but hey,
[Amit Varma]: you know, he's a guy. So how is and you know, this could just be a web series, right? The people
[Amit Varma]: involved are so interesting. So tell me about this entire period. And like you, you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: that when you started doing this book, you did not think that Mahalanobis and the ISI would be such
[Amit Varma]: an important part of it. And they became like that. So how did you discover these narratives?
[Amit Varma]: And how did they form? And just tell me about this period and what it led to?
[Guest]: Yeah, the story of Mahalanobis really came alive for me when I came across some papers of
[Guest]: Pitambar Pant, which are at the Nehru Memorial Museum. It's a very slim set of documents,
[Guest]: and it's mostly letters between Pitambar Pant and Mahalanobis. Pitambar Pant was a,
[Guest]: also somebody who trained in physics, became, was a jailmate of Nehru during the Quitindian movement,
[Guest]: then became one of Nehru's private secretaries during the time that he was Prime Minister.
[Guest]: And on one of these visits in the early in the late 1940s to the Institute in Calcutta,
[Guest]: Mahalanobis says, you know, like, asked Nehru, can you depute two or three people to come help
[Guest]: with the work of the International School Institute? Because I think that apart from
[Guest]: doing our research, we can help with national development as well. Nehru is not able to send
[Guest]: two, three people, but he sends Pitambar Pant. And then Pitambar Pant over the next two decades
[Guest]: becomes this kind of bridge between Calcutta and Delhi. He rises to some prominence at the
[Guest]: International School Institute as I think the Secretary of the Institute there. But at the
[Guest]: same time, he's also heads the manpower planning division at Yojana Bhavan in Delhi. And so and
[Guest]: because he has the ear of Mahalanobis and Nehru, he's able to sort of play this role as a bridge.
[Guest]: And so in his letters, in his documents at Teenmurti at the Nehru Memorial Library,
[Guest]: I found these letters between him and Mahalanobis exchanged in 1954.
[Guest]: While Pitambar Pant is in Calcutta, and Mahalanobis is just jet setting across the world,
[Guest]: he's in Prague one day, he's in London the other, in Washington the other, in Moscow another,
[Guest]: and he's writing these letters back to Pitambar Pant. And it's during a time that Mahalanobis
[Guest]: is discovering that he can play a role outside of statistics as perhaps a planner as well.
[Guest]: And that really brought alive this moment of transition from a physicist to a statistician
[Guest]: to economic policy. And so I thought that and in those letters, he's talking about both the
[Guest]: importance of statistics for planning and about the importance of computers for planning.
[Guest]: And so I thought that this is something worth pursuing further. And so that's why
[Guest]: that's really how those stories first appealed to me. And I started exploring whether they can
[Guest]: become chapters in my book. About the broader context, I think that you put it very well,
[Guest]: that there are these two parallel stories that I'm trying to tell. And I'm trying to talk about
[Guest]: them in parallel, but also about how they don't remain parallel at all points. At some points,
[Guest]: they do have sort of offshoots that intersect. And the intersections are usually institutionally
[Guest]: through the International Statistical Institute, individually through Mahalanobis or C.D. Deshmukh
[Guest]: or Pitambar Pant or Nehru. And these two stories are, one is that, as you said, of a nation that
[Guest]: is in the throes of an anti-colonial movement. One that we know today, but they did not know now,
[Guest]: was soon to win freedom for India. And that the people involved are a cast of characters that are
[Guest]: sort of household names in India. You know, Subhash Chandra Bose, Nehru, Gandhi, Rabindranath
[Guest]: Tagore, G.D. Birla, J.R.D. Tata. All of these people are discussing planning. And so to me,
[Guest]: that is very fascinating. Why is it that on the eve of independence, planning is such an important
[Guest]: thing that they're all discussing and debating? Gandhi doesn't quite understand why it's important.
[Guest]: Tagore, in fact, thinks it's very important, doesn't understand why Gandhi does not think
[Guest]: it's important. And so supporting Bose and Nehru, saying that, you know, I think that you're the
[Guest]: only two modernists in the Congress party, and that you should push for this planning. At the
[Guest]: same time, G.D. Birla and J.R.D. Tata are also pushing for certain kinds of planning for very
[Guest]: self-interested reasons, as you point out as well. And so there's that story about a nation in the
[Guest]: making, about to be formed, and about these weighty matters of what will our economy and
[Guest]: polity be once we achieve independence. And at the same time, there's a story about a discipline
[Guest]: coming into its own. Statistics was not considered a scientific discipline until well into the 1930s
[Guest]: and maybe even 1940s in India. In the late 1920s, there are letters between Mahalanobis and a friend
[Guest]: of his in London, in which he is lamenting how he's taken seriously as a physicist, but statistics
[Guest]: is not given the time of day amongst other scientists in India. He refers to it in very
[Guest]: casteist language as being treated as an outcast. He says that it's seen as the thing that politicians
[Guest]: play around with, but it's not a serious science. He says that somebody told him in the Indian
[Guest]: Science Congress that if we were to grant statistics its own section at the Indian Science
[Guest]: Congress, which is a sort of annual body meeting of all scientists in India, chemists, botanists,
[Guest]: physicists, and Mahalanobis had been petitioning for statistics to get its own section within the
[Guest]: conference for them to meet. And the Indian Science Congress just flat out said no and said
[Guest]: that if we were to grant statistics a section, we might as well grant astrology one, right? So it
[Guest]: was seen basically on par with astrology. And what I tried to trace in the first chapter of my book
[Guest]: is how from the late 1920s through the labors of the Indian Statistical Institute and Mahalanobis
[Guest]: and this alliance with the National Planning Committee set up by the Congress government
[Guest]: and advances in statistics across the world, aided by the Second World War, the rise of the GDP,
[Guest]: the role of economists like Simon Kuznets, et cetera, V. K. R. V. Rao, who comes up with India's
[Guest]: first national income estimates, that by 1946, when the Indian Science Congress has its annual meeting,
[Guest]: the person chairing that entire conference is Mahalanobis, not because he's a physicist,
[Guest]: but because of his work as a statistician, right? And so you see the rise of a discipline
[Guest]: that goes alongside the progress of this nationalist movement. And this is the role
[Guest]: of contingency, right? As just as centralized planning comes to take form in the minds of the
[Guest]: Congress party as being important, and they're talking about the lack of data, this is something
[Guest]: I find in Nehru's handwritten notes from the 1930s onwards, this bemoaning the lack of adequate
[Guest]: statistics in India. At the same time, India, it's not just that he says, hey, I have this friend,
[Guest]: it's that India is now making globally pioneering contributions to sample serving,
[Guest]: which is useful anywhere, but it's particularly useful in a poor country where you do not have
[Guest]: the state capacity to undertake, you know, plot to plot enumeration, or very painstaking,
[Guest]: very expensive enumerations that do, you know, counting each item, which, by the way, scientifically
[Guest]: has also been proven to be more error ridden than sample serving. So it's in sense there,
[Guest]: there is that contingency of these two things happening at the same time, which leads to
[Guest]: the Institute being tapped as being extremely important for the growth of India's national
[Guest]: statistics, which is why the Central Statistical Organization, the National Sample Survey, all
[Guest]: these national level organizations tended to be staffed from the Indian Statistical Institute in
[Guest]: Calcutta, not because, I would argue, not because of a favoritism, but because really, it was the,
[Guest]: it was almost the only game in town. It was an internationally recognized center for excellence
[Guest]: in this, the very thing that the Planning Commission was looking for, which is why
[Guest]: actually the Planning Commission was jealous sometimes of the Institutional Institute,
[Guest]: because they would have liked to have done it themselves, but they did not have the expertise
[Guest]: either. And that's why in some ways, Indian statistical policy and then economic policy
[Guest]: kind of gets farmed out from Delhi to Calcutta for a decade, at least.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you've written about, you know, how early on in the statistical field,
[Amit Varma]: Mahalanobis, time and again, is almost proven right. For example, you know, there was this
[Amit Varma]: competition in Bengal, where there were arguments about random sample surveys, do they even work,
[Amit Varma]: are they accurate, and so on and so forth. And the Bengal government in 1944 actually said that,
[Amit Varma]: okay, let's use both the methods, let PC Mahalanobis do his random sample survey kind
[Amit Varma]: of thing. And at the same time, we will do our, you know, our detailed enumerations and all of
[Amit Varma]: that. And as you point out that the government was off the mark by 16.6%, Mahalanobis was off
[Amit Varma]: the mark by 0.3%. And for all you know, and saved a lot of money, and saved a lot of money. So it
[Amit Varma]: was just in every aspect, it was much better. So, you know, in terms of the power of statistics in
[Amit Varma]: terms of, you know, what they can reveal about the world, Mahalanobis is on to something has
[Amit Varma]: been proven right. And this must make him feel incredibly powerful. But is there a danger here?
[Amit Varma]: And this is really more a question about human beings and about that particular human being,
[Amit Varma]: that is there a danger here that this can lead to a kind of hubris, where you have this incredibly
[Amit Varma]: powerful tool, and you have actually been so successful with that tool in whatever you have
[Amit Varma]: done so far. And you imagine, therefore, that you can use that tool to reshape the world. And we see
[Amit Varma]: signs of this hubris in a lot of the things that he does through the 50s, for example, where for,
[Amit Varma]: you know, he'll be going to foreign countries, and he'll be doing the things diplomats should
[Amit Varma]: be doing, right. And he, of course, looks down on diplomats and considers them incompetent and
[Amit Varma]: whatever. And but he's talking directly to other governments and Nehru is kind of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: not approving, but at the same time, not, you know, messing with him too much. And in other
[Amit Varma]: descriptions, you've described him as a benevolent autocrat, as it were, where he is like a little
[Amit Varma]: dictator in the ISI. And he's kind of doing his thing. So he's become this figure who in his own
[Amit Varma]: head is sort of, he's got it figured out. And his only frustration is why don't more people listen
[Amit Varma]: to me, which remains a frustration for a long time. And eventually, you point out that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, Calcutta takes over Delhi and, you know, by the time the second plan comes around, Mahalanobis
[Amit Varma]: kind of had his, has his way where for a couple of years, he's dominant. And at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: while there is this tremendous hubris in Mahalanobis, you also have Nehru, who, as you've
[Amit Varma]: quoted, famously says that he'd prefer one technocrat to four bureaucrats, right. And this
[Amit Varma]: reminds me of what Harry Truman once said of economists, where he said, give me a one handed
[Amit Varma]: economist, because he was tired, because, you know, his advisors kept saying on one hand this,
[Amit Varma]: on the other hand that, and he wanted sort of decisiveness. And one can imagine Nehru wanting
[Amit Varma]: that same kind of decisiveness, because as you pointed out, when he wrote Discovery of India,
[Amit Varma]: he was sort of aware that the India that he would like is not the India that is out there.
[Amit Varma]: In some ways, he invented his idea of India, he created this idea of India within himself,
[Amit Varma]: it was an act of invention, right. And I wonder if there was sort of a certain hubris there,
[Amit Varma]: that if he's getting so much done, you are an independent country, you are the Prime Minister,
[Amit Varma]: you have sort of superimposed your vision of what society would be like, in the design of the state
[Amit Varma]: in whatever influence he had on the Constitution, and so on and so forth, that you just continue
[Amit Varma]: then thinking in that technocratic way, and therefore favouring technocrats, where you are
[Amit Varma]: like what complexity, I conquered it, you know, I won, I conquered it, here I am, I've created this,
[Amit Varma]: I am creating this, I will not let these people stop me. And therefore, in a sense, these two guys
[Amit Varma]: are made for each other. Right. And as far as choosing planning is concerned, you know, what
[Amit Varma]: you said earlier in the episode, what you've written in your book, I completely buy that there
[Amit Varma]: is pretty much no other way they could have gone. It was a logic of the times, it was commonly
[Amit Varma]: accepted throughout the world at that point in time, the Soviet Union appeared to be a success,
[Amit Varma]: you know, free markets were allied in people's minds with colonial ills. So at that point in
[Amit Varma]: time, that is a reasonable choice. I'm not debating that. But I'm just looking at these
[Amit Varma]: two really fascinating personalities with their own individual fatal conceits, as it were. And
[Amit Varma]: it seems, in a sense, as therefore as a marriage made in heaven, that, you know, Mahalanobis has
[Amit Varma]: that kind of hubris and the engineering mindset and what Pratap would call the tech solutionism.
[Amit Varma]: And, and that's exactly what Nehru wants. He wants decisiveness, he is reinventing a nation.
[Amit Varma]: And it's it's kind of, you know, therefore, you know, just a perfect storm.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think that what you said puts me in mind of an anecdote that Milton Friedman recounts in
[Guest]: the book about the one time that he met Mahalanobis, they met in the summer of 1955. I think
[Guest]: Milton Friedman, of course, is the celebrity free market economist, you know, one of the best known
[Guest]: economists of the 20th century, and perhaps the most associated with American Reaganite free
[Guest]: market beliefs. There's a, there's a good story about how Friedman, Mahalanobis was asking the
[Guest]: American government to send some economists deputed by the American government to the
[Guest]: Indian Statistical Institute in Calcutta. And the person I think this was in 1954, the year before,
[Guest]: and the person they had recommended was Milton Friedman, who was then a very young economist,
[Guest]: not not so well known as he was to become later. That was about to happen. And Mahalanobis,
[Guest]: since he was a jet setter, happened to be in Geneva, because he was elected the president
[Guest]: of the UN Statistical Commission. By the way, he was elected president of the UN Statistical
[Guest]: Commission on numerous times, nominated both by the United States and the Soviet Union.
[Guest]: So he was in Geneva, and he happened to come across another American economist,
[Guest]: John Kenneth Galbraith. And when he told Galbraith that that the American government
[Guest]: was about to send Friedman to India to help with, you know, the planning exercises,
[Guest]: Galbraith joked saying that having Milton Friedman, a free market economist, coming to
[Guest]: advise on planning was like having the Pope advise on family planning, right? And so that, you know,
[Guest]: tickled Mahalanobis enough that he decided that instead of having Milton Friedman come,
[Guest]: he invited John Kenneth Galbraith instead. Anyway, Milton Friedman does come the next year to India,
[Guest]: and he meets Mahalanobis in Delhi at the Planning Commission. And in his memoirs, written with his
[Guest]: wife called Two Lucky People, he talks, he has a very, I think, insightful comment about Mahalanobis,
[Guest]: and I think that gets to your point about the hubris. He says that Mahalanobis reminded him,
[Guest]: Mahalanobis was a mathematically gifted person. And he said that the issue with people who are
[Guest]: mathematically gifted is that their gifts come to them very young. And so from a very young age,
[Guest]: they are accustomed to being able to crack the code, to being able to come up with one single
[Guest]: value neutral answer that is either right, right, or wrong. And not only did they come to arrive at
[Guest]: that freak often, they come to expect it in other fields of life as well. And the problem with that,
[Guest]: and then he quotes Adam Smith. So you have Milton Friedman quoting Adam Smith from the Wealth of
[Guest]: Nations, he says that, unfortunately, they start to think of themselves as somebody controlling
[Guest]: chess pieces on the great chessboard of humanity. But whereas you actually never have control over
[Guest]: human beings, and humanity is not a chessboard. And so you cannot predict the outcomes or the
[Guest]: strategies of the people because you do not hold human beings and Indian citizens are not like the
[Guest]: knight that you hold in your hand that you can, you know, take across the chessboard. And so he
[Guest]: says that that is the problem that he saw with somebody like Mahalanobis is that he had good
[Guest]: reason to think that he was right, because probably growing up, he was always right, because he was
[Guest]: gifted mathematically. And he said that this is a problem with mathematicians becoming economists
[Guest]: and turning economists, which is that they start to expect this kind of response. It is an irony
[Guest]: of history that it is the kind of economics that Milton Friedman was a spouse, that would become
[Guest]: perhaps the most quantitative in the present day as well. So I wonder what you think about that,
[Guest]: were he around today. But I think that it does lead to a hubris that at a very young age, he's
[Guest]: very accomplished. The kinds of people he's interacting with in Cambridge on his long Sunday
[Guest]: morning strolls are Srinivasa Ramanujan, the sort of mathematical genius as well, who even for
[Guest]: someone mathematically gifted as Mahalanobis, Ramanujan blows his mind. But Mahalanobis before
[Guest]: independence is only, I think, the 11th or 12th Indian inducted into the fellowship as a fellow
[Guest]: of the Royal Society, which is an extremely prestigious honor for somebody in the British
[Guest]: Empire at the time. And only 12 Indians had ever been a part of it right through centuries of its
[Guest]: history. And so you realize that this is, you're not just talking about a globetrotting academic
[Guest]: in the way that a globetrotting academic is today, because today they're a legion, there have been
[Guest]: thousands of them. At the time, there are very few people like Homi Bhabha, like Vikram Sarabhai,
[Guest]: like Mahalanobis, people who are eminent and distinguished in their field internationally
[Guest]: and recognized as internationally relevant and important. And I think that that leads to a sense
[Guest]: of hubris, along with this mathematical predisposition. And I think that that is also
[Guest]: why Nehru comes to rely so much on these technocrats, who, as you said, and as I quote,
[Guest]: he says, I prefer one technocrat to four bureaucrats. And I think it's because
[Guest]: the bureaucrats all depend on him to make the final decision, right? I mean, as when you're
[Guest]: in the archives, you see letters upon letters on the smallest, most mundane thing getting kicked
[Guest]: up to the Prime Minister. I mean, many things that, you know, like the Chaprasis uniform,
[Guest]: things that you feel like the Prime Minister should not be bothering about this. But because
[Guest]: it's a time of a new nation being born, of everything becoming a precedent, Nehru has
[Guest]: to answer all these questions, or at least he feels like he has to answer all these questions.
[Guest]: Perhaps that was a mistake. But with these other people, he feels like they, firstly,
[Guest]: he feels a sense that they're similar to him in that they come from a similar background.
[Guest]: He knows that they're internationally respected. He knows that they don't need to be,
[Guest]: he doesn't need quality control because they're internationally respected in that way.
[Guest]: They're entrepreneurial. So they are getting things done that India might not otherwise have.
[Guest]: So, for example, I talk about how Mahalanobis brings India its first computers. Now, it's a
[Guest]: different matter that he becomes a thorn in his own side in getting one from America because
[Guest]: of his perceived communist sympathies. But, you know, India is not the second richest Asian nation
[Guest]: by a long stretch, but is the second Asian nation to get any computer, any digital computer.
[Guest]: Why? Because of Mahalanobis and because of how bloody minded he got about getting this computer,
[Guest]: that he was just obsessive about it and would leverage every contact he developed over his life
[Guest]: to be able to get it for India. Another part is that unlike these bureaucrats who are constantly
[Guest]: need to be in this kind of like, you know, like an email chain from hell, but except it's a letter
[Guest]: chain from hell because it just never ends with the prime minister. These technocrats get stuff
[Guest]: done and many times don't cost the government a single rupee because they're paid for by their
[Guest]: institutions, which are often private as well. They have foreign grants as well. So, Mahalanobis
[Guest]: is in Sweden, not paid for by the government of India. He's paid for by the UN Statistical
[Guest]: Commission. And on the side, he's doing this sort of side deal to get India a computer,
[Guest]: stepping on the toes of diplomats, which is why diplomats like Vaidehi Gundavia are so incensed.
[Guest]: They're like, who is this random dude who just shows up and is talking to the Soviet ambassador?
[Guest]: That is a breach of like a hundred protocols. But he's talking to them, then he's drinking with them,
[Guest]: then he's getting a deal. And then he's promising saying that I will try to get X amount of dollars,
[Guest]: you know, for the UN to say that they will commission that for you to send a computer
[Guest]: to India. No, don't send it to the ISI because it should not be the property of the ISI. It should
[Guest]: be the property of the government of India. So, I will now loop the government of India into this
[Guest]: chain. And so, this sort of thing is appalling to diplomats and ambassadors because he's taking
[Guest]: their entire job and he's getting lots of stuff done much quicker than they would have managed to,
[Guest]: because he's not hemmed in by the kinds of protocols that they have to. But for the prime
[Guest]: minister, a lot of this just comes as bonus, right? This is very good for him that these people are
[Guest]: doing these things without it costing India very much often, right? India sometimes just has to be
[Guest]: like, maybe like if he has to get from X to Y in Europe, India might sort of pay some money,
[Guest]: but otherwise it's taken care of by these international organizations and private
[Guest]: universities flying him in and out of different places. So, I think that apart from that,
[Guest]: I mean, Sunil Khilnani says in The Idea of India that Mahalanobis was the kind
[Guest]: of personality that Nehru was bound to be seduced by. I understand where he comes from,
[Guest]: but I do think that the structural aspect of the importance of statistics and about the
[Guest]: how integral and critical data became to centralized planning cannot be overlooked. So,
[Guest]: yes, Homi Bhabha, yes, Vikram Sarabhai, yes, Mahalanobis, but again, if those things weren't
[Guest]: important to nation building at the time, I don't think that those people would be as
[Guest]: significant, right? So, whatever the personality of Mahalanobis was, if he did not occupy that
[Guest]: position, right, what if he was just a physicist? He would not have been as important because he
[Guest]: didn't work on the kinds of physics that was as important for nation building as he did.
[Guest]: Right? It's because he turned from a physicist to a statistician with interests in economics
[Guest]: that he came to play this role. So, I think that that structural aspect, while keeping in mind the
[Guest]: personality traits of hubris, while keeping in mind the traits of Nehru's preference for
[Guest]: technocracy and for expertise and top-down management, I think that this institutional
[Guest]: and social and intellectual context needs to be always borne in mind.
[Amit Varma]: I love what Friedman said about Mahalanobis, which, of course, you've reproduced in your book,
[Amit Varma]: and Adam Smith's great essay, of course, is, I think, called The Man of System,
[Amit Varma]: which is basically about, you know, the man of system looks at the whole world as a chess board,
[Amit Varma]: and I'll move this piece there, I'll move that piece there, mate in three, but the point is,
[Amit Varma]: the pieces are individual actors of their own. And there aren't 32 of them, there are millions
[Amit Varma]: and millions and you can't quite go there. Regarding, you know, apparent irony of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, maths being important later for free market economists and all that,
[Amit Varma]: I think Friedman's central point here was that, you know, being that good in math gives you a
[Amit Varma]: kind of hubris where you think you can order society. And it's important to have the humility
[Amit Varma]: to recognise that no one can possibly do that, and therefore to respect human agency and trust
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, free markets and the price system and spontaneous order and so on and so forth will,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that everything will work out that way. And I think that is a position he would
[Amit Varma]: have taken. And it's completely orthogonal that math just became generally important
[Amit Varma]: in all kinds of economics later on down the line. But his point was more a point about
[Amit Varma]: go easy on the coercion and go easy on the state, trying to, you know, be men of system, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: So one of the sort of impressions I had before I read your book is that planning was all Mahalanobis
[Amit Varma]: and he dominated the entire period of planning and so on and so forth. But reading your book,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I realised that there's a different dramatic arc to the whole thing, that of course,
[Amit Varma]: he's important. But when the first five year plan is being done, and all that he is kind of still a
[Amit Varma]: figure on the side, he's not the head of the planning commission, but he's in charge of ISI
[Amit Varma]: and statistics and data and all that he's playing a key role. But then what happens is that between
[Amit Varma]: that and the second five year plan, he manoeuvres his way to a position of dominance. And then the
[Amit Varma]: second five year plan is all Mahalanobis. And it's a very interesting dramatic arc, because
[Amit Varma]: there is that story of how he's manoeuvring his way to get to that position of preeminence,
[Amit Varma]: helped along, of course, by Nehru's fondness for him and a person like him. And at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: that there is a lot of internal opposition, which is playing out in interesting ways. And eventually
[Amit Varma]: he manages to get, you know, the second five year plan through. But eventually, that also kind of
[Amit Varma]: begins to go to pieces. So those six or seven years are really fascinating. So take me through
[Guest]: that period. In some ways, I'd say, Amit, that in the mind of Mahalanobis, the battles begin even
[Guest]: earlier. Like I said to him, he's fighting a battle from the 1930s onwards to try to prove
[Guest]: that statistics is a science, should be taken seriously as a science in India. And in some
[Guest]: ways, the apex of that is when he wins out by 1946, where he is the sort of big dada at the
[Guest]: Indian Science Congress himself. But then in his mind, the battle moves to a different level,
[Guest]: the battle moves to Delhi, where the structural factors that I've talked about, the contextual
[Guest]: factors ensure that statistics is going to be essential for nation building, and is going to
[Guest]: be important for nation building. And as Mahalanobis always says to him, statistics must have
[Guest]: a purpose. It can't just be a science just for pure science purposes, but it needs to serve a
[Guest]: social function. And he sees that through the vehicle of planning, he sees planning as the way
[Guest]: for that to be done. But he finds himself on the outside of the Planning Commission, he's not a
[Guest]: member of the Planning Commission, he has absolutely no training in economics at all. This
[Guest]: is something to remember, which is why it is dramatic that this person with no training in
[Guest]: economics writes the single most influential economics document in the history of independent
[Guest]: India till 1991. The second five-year plan is the blueprint for India's economy till liberalization,
[Guest]: and was done by a man who had no training in economics. And this comes through in those
[Guest]: letters that I talked to you about with Pitambar Panth, when he talks about, especially this,
[Guest]: he writes to Pitambar Panth, I forget from where, I think from Europe, but he's going through Europe,
[Guest]: America, and then eventually ends up in the Soviet Union. And on these travels, he writes to
[Guest]: this very revealing letter to Pitambar Panth saying that, you know, the reason that I travel
[Guest]: abroad is because I want to make contacts with these foreign economists, because as you know,
[Guest]: I have no training in economics, and I have an insecurity about that. It's very rare for a man
[Guest]: like Mahatma Gandhi to actually say that he's insecure about anything. I mean, and the man is
[Guest]: someone who has like great achievements in one field, but was trained in an entirely separate
[Guest]: field. Now he's taking on a third field. So perhaps he had reason to feel insecure. And he
[Guest]: says that because I'm insecure about this, and because Indian economists don't take me seriously,
[Guest]: actually meeting with and seeing that some of these foreign economists agree with me gives me,
[Guest]: you know, sort of strengthens his spine, straightens his spine, and makes him feel
[Guest]: like he can have a policy role. And seeing that their views in some ways echo his, or maybe,
[Guest]: you know, some of it also might have just been, as I say in the book, selection bias as well,
[Guest]: that he just chose people who might have agreed with him, made him feel like that he was going
[Guest]: abroad in order to be relevant in India, right? He left India in order to be relevant in India.
[Guest]: He went abroad to get ammunition against domestic detractors, against domestic critics. And so,
[Guest]: in his mind, he sees his enemies in the Planning Commission as VT Krishnamachari and Tarlog Singh,
[Guest]: again, people that Nehru favors, right? So it isn't as if Nehru is protecting him against
[Guest]: other people, because the other people that are fighting with Mahalanobis are also people that are
[Guest]: under sort of Nehru's patronage, right? Nehru has picked VT Krishnamachari to be the Deputy
[Guest]: Chairman of the Planning Commission, which is the single most important position in the Planning
[Guest]: Commission, and Tarlog Singh to be the Secretary of the Planning Commission, so much so that the
[Guest]: Planning Commission comes to be referred to as the Tarlog Sabha, right? The Tarlog Singh's Sabha.
[Guest]: The people there don't like Mahalanobis and Mahalanobis' growing influence in the corridors
[Guest]: of the Yojana Bhavan, because they see him as someone who has not been an administrator like
[Guest]: VT Krishnamachari has, having to deal with real administrative situations, not trained in economics
[Guest]: like Tarlog Singh has been, or someone who's been like the the governor of a central bank,
[Guest]: like even CD Deshmukh has been. So to them, Mahalanobis is just this rank outsider who is
[Guest]: also just sort of infiltrating on their territory. And you know, there's also this sort of
[Guest]: territorial politics. And what Mahalanobis manages to do is to put together the reflected influence
[Guest]: of foreign academics, and the influence he gains from inviting many of these foreign academics to
[Guest]: his own institute in Baranagor, in Calcutta, at the Interstitial Institute, such that the
[Guest]: Interstitial Institute becomes really a hub of economists traveling from abroad to India. And
[Guest]: whenever they'd come to India, apart from being in Delhi, they'd go to Calcutta, because they'd
[Guest]: been invited by the Interstitial Institute. And so the fact that he was rubbing shoulders with
[Guest]: these very famous economists, and these weren't, I mean, some of them were not so very well known
[Guest]: economists, but they did include some who went on to win Nobel Prize, like Richard Stone,
[Guest]: Gunnar Myrdal, other well known economists like John Kenneth Galbraith. So all of these people
[Guest]: are coming to the ISI, they all know Mahalanobis, and they all agree with different parts of his
[Guest]: ideas. And as, as my book discusses, the Mahalanobis model, one thing that I really think people have
[Guest]: sort of forgotten about Mahalanobis model is that this was genuinely a mainstream view at the time,
[Guest]: right, that in some ways, Mahalanobis is almost given too much credit for his originality,
[Guest]: because actually, this is what many economists, development economists across the world were
[Guest]: recommending, which is why I think it's a mistake to think of the second five year plan as some sort
[Guest]: of Nehruvian idiosyncrasy. It's not idiosyncratic for Nehru to have chosen this. In fact, if he'd
[Guest]: chosen a free market model, that would have seemed idiosyncratic at the time, because that was not
[Guest]: the median position. The median position was for state sponsored industrial growth. The debates
[Guest]: then were between export led or import substitution, and India chose import substitution,
[Guest]: perhaps to its detriment compared to the East Asian economies. And so you have these letters
[Guest]: that go back and forth between Nehru, between, sorry, Mahalanobis and C.D. Deshmukh, who'd sort
[Guest]: of formed an alliance because Deshmukh had known Mahalanobis from before, they became friends when
[Guest]: C.D. Deshmukh was the governor of the RBI. And the RBI used to spend the summer months in Calcutta.
[Guest]: During that time in Calcutta, C.D. Deshmukh would land up at Amrapali, which is the Mahalanobis'
[Guest]: house name for these long, lazy Sunday lunches. And then they became friends. C.D. Deshmukh even
[Guest]: became the president of the Indian Statistical Institute. And then when C.D. Deshmukh became
[Guest]: finance minister of India in the early 1950s, obviously now Mahalanobis has an ally in the
[Guest]: finance ministry itself. But at the planning commission, they don't take too kindly to this
[Guest]: presumption by Mahalanobis interfering in their matters. And in fact, in the letters, I found that
[Guest]: Mahalanobis and C.D. Deshmukh even come up with this resignation pact saying that, you know, if
[Guest]: Tarlok Singh and V.T. Krishnamachari keep whispering these things behind our back, they won't even say
[Guest]: to our faces, but behind our back, they keep badmouthing us and the second five-year plan
[Guest]: ideas that we have. If this continues, then we'll just have to tender our resignation to the prime
[Guest]: minister. This cannot continue. But eventually, they do win out. And the fact that he has the
[Guest]: finance minister on his side, the prime minister also believes in these views, a panel of economists
[Guest]: that they put together, 19 out of the 20 economists, except for B.R. Sinha, of course, all agree with
[Guest]: the plan broadly. All of that, in some ways, outflanks V.T. Krishnamachari and Tarlok Singh,
[Guest]: such that Mahalanobis is able to come out on top vis-a-vis them. But as I detail in the book,
[Guest]: this was something that had really caught the attention of the chattering classes in Delhi.
[Guest]: I mean, you look at the pages of the Economic Weekly, which is the predecessor to the Economic
[Guest]: and Political Weekly, and almost every month, there's some reference to how Mahalanobis is,
[Guest]: you know, is swatting aside the senile doddering crowd, as they refer to it, at the Planning
[Guest]: Commission, how economists have been left outside, out of economic policy, like, and I quote, like
[Guest]: Vrindavan without Krishna, it is now like, because they say that, you know, that the people to whom
[Guest]: they should be home are now homeless, that all the economists have been swatted aside by the ISI
[Guest]: crowd, that Calcutta has basically overtaken Delhi. And so this was a very dramatic moment.
[Guest]: And this is in the early 1950s. And the pinnacle of Mahalanobis' influence is in the two, three
[Guest]: years right after, once the second five-year plan comes into effect, 1956, and the first two years
[Amit Varma]: after that. You know, one lovely image I love from your book is where you're talking about
[Amit Varma]: Mahalanobis' frustration being like he's on a rocking horse, and he's moving back and forth
[Amit Varma]: and back and forth, but there's no movement, he's not actually getting anywhere. It's just,
[Amit Varma]: you know, rocking, which reminded me of DH Lawrence's great story, The Rocking Horse
[Amit Varma]: Winner, I think it was called. There's another sort of fundamental question, which is at stake
[Amit Varma]: here, which is, as you pointed out earlier at the start of the episode, and at the start of your
[Amit Varma]: book, India's planning experiment is unique, in the sense that it is combining Soviet style
[Amit Varma]: centralized planning by the state with liberal democracy. The criticism of planning, per se,
[Amit Varma]: is that it leads to an authoritarian state this, you know, by centralizing all this power by saying
[Amit Varma]: we'll plan the economy, the state takes more power into its own hands. And the danger is that it will
[Amit Varma]: become authoritarian, and individual freedom will suffer and the balance between state and the
[Amit Varma]: society will, you know, remain dramatically in favor of the state. This is a criticism.
[Amit Varma]: But what, you know, Nehru and Mahalanobis and others were implicitly saying is that, no,
[Amit Varma]: this is a democratic experiment, that we'll get the people on our side, that the people will have
[Amit Varma]: an input into what planning is. And, you know, we're not going to lapse into becoming an
[Amit Varma]: authoritarian state, which seems kind of rhetorical. But, you know, so how did that actually
[Amit Varma]: play out? Like today, with the benefit of hindsight, you know, what do we see? Was it really
[Amit Varma]: possible for such a centralized planning system to go hand in hand with a true liberal democracy?
[Amit Varma]: Or was it a contradiction that could not have been resolved despite the rhetoric for it?
[Guest]: Yeah, this argument, or rather the idea of democratic planning, that phrase democratic
[Guest]: planning first shows up in the archives that I look at, I saw a handwritten note by Nehru, in
[Guest]: which he's also, you know, doing other interesting things like just doodling, because you can tell
[Guest]: that in some of these meetings, he sort of loses patience, and he's just doodling on the side.
[Guest]: But the phrase democratic planning is written by him in a letter in some of his notes that I found
[Guest]: in 1939. So as early as that, he's thinking about this, this sort of combining democracy and
[Guest]: planning. And I think that democratic planning, in some ways, served three or four purposes. The
[Guest]: first was that there was this rhetoric of democratic planning. And I think in the minds of some people,
[Guest]: such as at least say Nehru, it was a genuine belief that Indian planning had to be different
[Guest]: from communist planning, that the Indian planning experiment cannot involve force in the way that
[Guest]: the planning experiments in China and the Soviet Union did. And that part of being a liberal
[Guest]: democracy is for people to be a part of the grand experiments that the state is involved in. And that
[Guest]: Indian citizenship, and this is something that scholars like Taylor Sherman, Neeraja Gopal Jayal,
[Guest]: etc, have written about, is that Indian citizenship had a specific meaning in those early years,
[Guest]: which is that, yes, you get the gift of this being a citizen, but it comes with certain,
[Guest]: that their rights come with certain obligations and duties. And part of the duty of that would
[Guest]: be to work towards national development, right? That that's the implicit expectation, of course,
[Guest]: not justiciable, not sort of enforceable in any way, but part of the implicit expectation. And
[Guest]: it's why you do actually see in the early 1950s, lots of people just volunteering for these national
[Guest]: efforts. So there's that aspect, the sort of the most highfalutin romantic view of democratic
[Guest]: planning. Another aspect that is also ideological is that India needed at that time, at a time when,
[Guest]: as you mentioned, India was even being territorially sutured together, at a time when India is coming
[Guest]: out of two centuries of colonialism, coming out of the horrors, and the extreme violence of
[Guest]: partition, India needed new national narratives. And development was meant to be one of the primary
[Guest]: master narratives of this. And how is development to be had? Through planning. And so planning
[Guest]: became this kind of, that's why in speeches, in movies, in songs, it's why, for example,
[Guest]: I found a song, which is actually now you can find on YouTube, sung by Lata Mangeshkar and
[Guest]: Mohammad Rafi, in which the chorus is, kehdo yeh gaon ke jaat ko aur shehar ke gentleman ko,
[Guest]: kamiyab hum karke rahenge paanch saal ke plan ko. I mean, that's an absurd lyric,
[Guest]: unless you understand this context, right, of a nation in which everybody, including the movie,
[Guest]: this is not like patronized, this is not a movie that is funded by the government of India,
[Guest]: it is a private movie that is playing to its audience, and its audience, it realizes,
[Guest]: keeps hearing about these panch varshya yojanas. And so part of the theme of this movie was nation
[Guest]: building. And which is why you have, you know, Lata Mangeshkar singing, haan paanch saal ke plan
[Guest]: ko, that's the sort of refrain in the song. And in that time, you needed unifying national
[Guest]: messages and planning became one of those. So those are two of the ideological reasons that I
[Guest]: think democratic planning became the sort of flip side of international non-alignment, right? So you
[Guest]: have non-alignment in foreign policy, which is that we will not ally with either of the superpowers,
[Guest]: the United States, or the Soviet Union. Domestically, what that means is that we're
[Guest]: not going to follow either of these options fully either. We're going to have this sort of mixed
[Guest]: economy, this mixture between what is the sort of seen as on both sides of the Iron Curtain.
[Amit Varma]: But I mean, in practice, of course, they weren't non-aligned for too long.
[Guest]: So right, yeah. And and so but I think there is a more real politic part of what democratic
[Guest]: planning was. The most important part of which is that India and India's elite realized very quickly
[Guest]: that India just simply did not have the state capacity to make these plans successful.
[Guest]: India needed its citizens to participate in this voluntary fashion to invest in the fashion that
[Guest]: these planners wanted but could not enforce, right? They needed people to buy into government
[Guest]: to India issued bonds, they needed to have Indians invest in the national plan loan,
[Guest]: they needed Indians to invest, buy, save, do all these things without the stick that communist
[Guest]: regimes did, right? They wanted the same things, but they did not have the stick. And nor did they
[Guest]: in this thing, because it's not a market economy, have the sort of the carrot enough for them to do
[Guest]: it. And so they needed these kind of contributions that are unremunerated by the citizens to
[Guest]: participate in large public undertakings like the Kosi Dam project, like building dispensaries and
[Guest]: schools in villages and gram panchayats. They needed citizens to participate in the narrative
[Guest]: of national development in a way that did not require the state to always pay them and that
[Guest]: this idea of democratic planning is the way in which it could be justified, right? That this
[Guest]: is what we're giving you. We're giving you a shot at development without taking away,
[Guest]: well, at least most of your basic liberal rights. And you have the option every five years of
[Guest]: voting us out of power. And I think the final reason that I think that democratic planning
[Guest]: was important to the Nehruvian state, for its own sake, is that the idea of democratic planning
[Guest]: legitimized the state in the eyes of the people, right? That this was the way in which the state,
[Guest]: when it, for example, and the government when it went to the polls was saying,
[Guest]: this is what we're doing for you. We're giving you, you have the right to vote,
[Guest]: you have all these liberal freedoms, and we're giving you development, and we are inviting you
[Guest]: to participate in it with us. And so I think those are the cluster of reasons because of which
[Guest]: democratic planning became, at least for the first 20 years after independence, this sort of reigning
[Guest]: ideology. And India would sometimes make these very tall claims internationally about how
[Guest]: India is providing a new path to the rest of the developing world, to the rest of decolonizing
[Guest]: world, to the rest of the non-aligned world, about how you can put together these seemingly
[Guest]: fundamentally contradictory ideas during the Cold War.
[Amit Varma]: So, Heinz Arndt, the Australian economist, you've quoted him of talking about Marlon
[Amit Varma]: Abelson saying, quote, he must be nearly 70, immensely vigorous, alert and intelligent,
[Amit Varma]: but also domineering, vain and bigoted, a Bengali aristocrat who in moving towards a
[Amit Varma]: Stalinist type authoritarianism has completely bypassed democratic liberal notions, and has
[Amit Varma]: never in any doubt who would plan and who would be planned for or against, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And everything that you just said, explains very well why the rhetoric of democratic
[Amit Varma]: planning is both powerful and appealing to the common person. But my question is that,
[Amit Varma]: can we now look back and say that as many of his critics alleged it would be that it is also
[Amit Varma]: incoherent, that it simply was never possible because it involved either state coercion,
[Amit Varma]: or relying on the voluntary actions of people and you pointed out how you know, in your book,
[Amit Varma]: you've pointed out of how a tourist went to the Taj Mahal, he'd wanted to visit it all his life,
[Amit Varma]: and he thought he'll be awed by it. But after visiting it, he said, what I was really awed by
[Amit Varma]: is that an entire village on their own without being paid, went and did some voluntary work
[Amit Varma]: for some project or whatever, which is fine, but it's an outlier, people are not going to
[Amit Varma]: do that beyond a point in time, it is not sustainable to ask people voluntarily to do
[Amit Varma]: that. And then not only is there an issue of state coercion, but there is also the issue of
[Amit Varma]: autonomy being denied, that when you have this mindset, that the state will control the economy
[Amit Varma]: from the commanding heights, you are also, you know, getting in the way of the private enterprise
[Amit Varma]: of people, you know, their ingenuity, and just stopping all of that putting an end to all the
[Amit Varma]: myriad voluntary actions through which a society raises itself. And we saw the power of some of
[Amit Varma]: that after 1991, for example. So the fascinating part of your book also is the second section,
[Amit Varma]: your first section is data, where we talk about planning and statistics coming together. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, all of that your second section is called democracy. And you have a couple of
[Amit Varma]: chapters in it. And the first of those chapters deals with how there was a concentrated effort
[Amit Varma]: by the government in making planning popular among the common people, one, because they wanted it to
[Amit Varma]: have democratic legitimacy in terms of the people supporting it. And two, because they felt that the
[Amit Varma]: people have to pitch in as well. Right. So tell me sort of a little bit about this, like you,
[Amit Varma]: you quote a piece from the Economic Weekly in 1956, is saying that planning has a touch of magic
[Amit Varma]: about it and an element of weird ritual too. And what can appeal more to the average Indian mind
[Amit Varma]: than magic and ritual, stop quote. And you know, there are so many films that you point out that
[Amit Varma]: are, you know, later made Naya Daur and, you know, songs like Chhodo Kal Ki Baatein from Hum
[Amit Varma]: Hindustani, which kind of clearly struck a chord with the popular imagination. At the same time,
[Amit Varma]: you have the lovely cartoon you referred to by R.K. Lakshman, where he's comparing where I'll
[Amit Varma]: just quote your words, in fact, where you say, quote, another cartoon years later, and in a
[Amit Varma]: different publication compared the plans to a donkey. R.K. Lakshman, the beloved visual chronicler
[Amit Varma]: of independent India portrayed the plans as an obstinate ass that wouldn't budge in the direction
[Amit Varma]: of prosperity, marked by a road sign. Unmoved by pulling or pushing and not tempted by the dangling
[Amit Varma]: carrot of foreign aid, the lazy donkey or five-year plan makes progress only when people lift it over
[Amit Varma]: their heads and run with it, stop quote. So tell me a little bit about sort of two connected
[Amit Varma]: questions. One is that you could argue that what the government did with the films division and so
[Amit Varma]: on, was run this incredible propaganda campaign at large scale to spread this message. So that's
[Amit Varma]: one thing that is happening. And the other thing that is happening is that it's not just that the
[Amit Varma]: state is doing everything from the top down. There's, this is resonating with the people,
[Amit Varma]: as we see from all the films and the books and so on and so forth, of which you've cited many,
[Amit Varma]: is resonating with the people. There is also a bottom-up sentiment that, yeah, planning is a way
[Amit Varma]: to go. So tell me about how all of this is playing out in the popular culture, because it's all kind
[Amit Varma]: of forgotten today, right? Cinema of the 50s and 60s and, you know, Chhodo Kal Ki Baatein.
[Guest]: Chhodo Kal Ki Baatein. Yeah, exactly.
[Guest]: No, thanks. Amit, this is actually a part of the book that I really enjoyed writing. And I think
[Guest]: it's a part of planning that is much less known about, which is this entire aspect of democratic
[Guest]: planning and how the government of India went about trying to actualize it. It realized that
[Guest]: it needed this informed and willing citizenry for plans to succeed. And how do you let people know
[Guest]: about the plans in a country that is overwhelmingly illiterate and uneducated is that you use every
[Guest]: means of propaganda at the government's disposal. So there were, just to sort of run through a quick
[Guest]: list, there was a song and drama division set up in which the government contracted with these
[Guest]: different dramatic troupes across the country in districts across the country, where they would
[Guest]: be given scripts by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in which they were being asked
[Guest]: to include their normal dramatic themes and try to tie it together with the five-year plan and talk
[Guest]: about the nation's progress. There was the films division, of course, which was the greatest
[Guest]: producer of documentaries in the second half of the 20th century. And the vast plurality of the
[Guest]: documentaries produced by the films division, which was, you know, played at every movie theater
[Guest]: before a commercial movie was run, or in fact, taken across the country in villages through a
[Guest]: projector onto, you know, like a bed sheet or something and played. And a majority of these
[Guest]: movies were about planning and development themes. There were these roving publicity officers hired
[Guest]: by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in New Delhi. Each publicity officer was either
[Guest]: assigned to a bullock cart unit, or a jeep unit, or a boat unit, and they would go to different
[Guest]: parts of India. And each of these units were the jeep unit, or the bullock cart unit basically was
[Guest]: a person, two people with a bullock cart. And on the back of the bullock carts were lots of pamphlets
[Guest]: in the local language about and posters, you know, visual posters about five-year plans and the aims
[Guest]: of the government, they would have a projector, they would have some sort of material that they
[Guest]: could share, they would have, you know, maybe some sort of puppets and things like that, with which
[Guest]: they could do make a small production. And the boat units had similar things and the jeep units
[Guest]: had similar things. The films division produced, you know, a wide variety of documentaries,
[Guest]: including one that I talk about in the book, which is quite inventive. It's about an alien
[Guest]: visiting India. And each of the visits by this alien is timed to the end of a five-year plan.
[Guest]: And this kind of bumbling villager is, you know, keeps complaining to the audience and looks through
[Guest]: the fourth wall and looks to the audience and says, do you see any change in India? I don't
[Guest]: see any change in India. But the visit of the alien every five years shows to the audience that
[Guest]: actually lots of things have changed. And so you see these different modes by which the government
[Guest]: was trying to reach out to people, and it included things. And the fact, as you said, that there is
[Guest]: some sort of way in which the public resonates with this. We can tell that the public resonates
[Guest]: with this propaganda because even private industry, a sort of private popular culture
[Guest]: reflects it. Like I talk about this play that was very popular and was performed by a dramatic
[Guest]: troupe in Delhi, three arts club across the country called Hamara Gaon, which is about a
[Guest]: village boy going to the village, finding that the village is very dirty and people aren't adopting
[Guest]: the ideals of the second five-year plan, of the five-year plan, and about how over his time in
[Guest]: the village, he tells him about what the government is doing for them, the five-year plans, etc.
[Guest]: And basically, the village's name is Barakpur, but this young city slicker says it's become
[Guest]: mostly like Narakpur, which is a play on hell in Hindi. And by the end of it, Barakpur sort of
[Guest]: regained its name as Barakpur because it's improved. One of the sort of great novels of
[Guest]: this era by Yashpal, which is Jhoota Sach, again has, I mean, it tells you something that one of
[Guest]: the great literary novels of the period has one of the main characters as somebody who works in
[Guest]: the planning commission. And this person is one of the few good characters in the novel, somebody
[Guest]: who comes to the aid of a partitioned sexual assault survivor, Tara, who's the real sort of
[Guest]: heroine of the novel. And in the end, their marriage is the only sort of happy ending in
[Guest]: the novel. And so I think that, and apart from that, there are these movies, as you mentioned,
[Guest]: Naya Daur, Chaar Dil Chaar Rahe, Naya Daur, which has Shammi Kapoor and Raj Kapoor in it,
[Guest]: and Meena Kumari, Chaar Dil Chaar Rahe, which has Dilip Kumar in it. And these films, the 1950s,
[Guest]: again, give you a sense that planning had just become a part of what everyone assumed to be
[Guest]: natural about India and its future. And I think that that is what in this chapter I'm trying to
[Guest]: convey that we've lost the sense about yes, it is top down. Yes, it is very state centric. Yes,
[Guest]: it is very, it is centralized. But it has become a part of the popular culture, and not necessarily
[Guest]: forced into the popular culture, though, I mean, that's debatable. I like to think that if it was
[Amit Varma]: such a part of the popular culture, I mean, the film division, you point out, was the largest
[Amit Varma]: producer of documentary films in the world. And they produce more than 8000 short films,
[Amit Varma]: documentaries, and newsreels. And it strikes me that there's a tremendous opportunity cost to that
[Amit Varma]: for such a poor country. You know, instead of spreading propaganda about planning, just spend
[Amit Varma]: that money on the people. And I love these ironic words by you towards the end of the chapter,
[Amit Varma]: when you write quote, after more than a decade of planned publicity, the government of India
[Amit Varma]: decided that it was time to assess the levels of planned consciousness in the nation. And you give
[Amit Varma]: some details of that. And then at the end, you write, ultimately, and unmindful of the irony,
[Amit Varma]: the study team concluded that the signal flaw in the government's planned publicity efforts
[Amit Varma]: was inadequate planning, stop good. And so it's almost like a satirical kind of novel. The reason
[Amit Varma]: planning did not work was we did not plan your last chapter is the most fascinating, and I didn't
[Amit Varma]: know a bit of it. And that is about the interplay of religion. And this effort to make planning
[Amit Varma]: popular, where essentially, the government decided that sadhus are the best messengers
[Amit Varma]: that we need religious symbolism, to explain scientific planning to people, and so on and so
[Amit Varma]: forth. So sort of tell me a little bit about all of that, I mean, which leads to something called
[Amit Varma]: the Bharat Sadhu Samaj. And it's just like an incredible story. Thanks. Yeah, so in 1956,
[Guest]: the government of India and many members of the of the Congress government, including the then
[Guest]: Minister of Planning, Gulzarilal Nanda, who would go on to become India's Home Minister,
[Guest]: go on to become an interim Prime Minister, as well twice. Gulzarilal Nanda and several
[Guest]: ministers and several members of the Congress Party meet with 50 sadhus at Birla Mandir in Delhi.
[Guest]: And this meeting is about how sadhus can help propagate the ideas of the five-year plan.
[Guest]: Because apart from using all every publicity arm of the government of this propaganda,
[Guest]: it was believed that actually would be good if there's some voluntary organizations. And one
[Guest]: of the voluntary organizations was the Bharat Sevak Samaj, which actually had quite a bit of
[Guest]: success across the country in in sort of channelizing India's youth and other people
[Guest]: who are sort of unemployed to doing things voluntarily for the development of the nation.
[Guest]: So many bridges, many small dispensaries, schools, etc, come to be built through the Bharat Sevak
[Guest]: Samaj. The Bharat Sadhu Samaj is a sort of eccentric sort of offshoot of the Bharat Sevak
[Guest]: Samaj. And the idea is that these sadhus can, because India is an overwhelmingly religious
[Guest]: country, and that religion has a hold on the people, we will try to use these sadhus to
[Guest]: propagate the message of the plan, planning this which is seen as so technocratic and irreligious.
[Guest]: But we will try to somehow bring these two together in order that the sadhus, when they
[Guest]: are talking to the people in their sermons, and they're doing their lectures, that they will
[Guest]: in some ways bring the Ramayana into conversation with the Dviti Panchvarshya Yojana. I mean,
[Guest]: it really seems harebrained, but this was an experiment that the government spent years on.
[Guest]: And its major patrons were Gulzar Lal Nanda and Rajendra Prasad, who was the president of India
[Guest]: at the time. I uncovered some letters, as I write in the book, that tell you, give you a sense of
[Guest]: how religious Gulzar Lal Nanda was. He was this very stern, honest Gandhian who would,
[Guest]: the story goes, sort of, you know, scold his grandson for using official government of India
[Guest]: stationery, because how can you use, you know, government of India stationery, because it's a
[Guest]: waste in this poor nation. He would talk about how his father would attend these, would have
[Guest]: conversations with visiting or itinerant sadhus when they came through his village. So somebody
[Guest]: who really had an admiration for sadhus, but also somebody who had some views that were quite out
[Guest]: there. I found letters that Gulzar Lal Nanda has with somebody who claims to be in conversation or
[Guest]: in touch with Gulzar Lal Nanda's dead father through a medium in an ashram in Ranchi, who says,
[Guest]: who refers to himself as Gurudev, and he says that, you know, and keeps writing letters to
[Guest]: the then planning minister of India saying that, you know, your father said this, your father said
[Guest]: that. And then when Nehru dies, he writes saying that, oh, you know, I could not, the medium could
[Guest]: not get in touch with your dead father, otherwise we could have avoided Nehru's death. So this is a
[Guest]: man who, you know, who is in charge of an institute of psychic research, constantly converses with his
[Guest]: astrologer, Haveli Ram. So it's somebody who really does believe in, you know, in spirituality,
[Guest]: in the power of Hindu religious symbols and of sadhus. And the position of Nehru is really
[Guest]: interesting on this. He has a very low opinion of many sadhus. He thinks that many of them are fakes,
[Guest]: that many of them are just people trying to shirk getting a job, that they're just pretending to be
[Guest]: sadhus, that they engage in all kinds of illicit activities. And this is actually borne out by
[Guest]: newspaper reports from the time many sadhus were accused at the time of kidnapping children,
[Guest]: of engaging in with, you know, with prostitutes, with actually setting up their own forts and
[Guest]: fighting with the government. And so the opinion of Nehru is pretty low of these sadhus. But
[Guest]: Gulzarilal Nanda is committed to this, sets up this Bharat Sadhu Samaj, which basically is a
[Guest]: government-funded organization for sadhus to use religious symbols to propagate five-year plans,
[Guest]: which again seems like such a strange idea. And their main outreach is during the Kumbh Mela,
[Guest]: when of course lakhs and lakhs of Hindu devotees are there. And then basically there would be a
[Guest]: pandal set up using Government of India money in which the Bharat Sadhu Samaj would set up this
[Guest]: pandal where I found the daily sort of schedule of one of these, the routine. And it was like 4am,
[Guest]: I mean, it's really punishing, you know, wake up at 4am, then snan, then shlokas, then lectures on
[Guest]: the holy motherland in the Vedic age, then about something very, and about how the ideals of Ram
[Guest]: can be made consistent with that of the Panchvarsha Yojana. So really strange stuff that is going on
[Guest]: at this time. But the Government of India is paying for it. And one of the ways in which it
[Guest]: is short-sighted is, and of course Nehru's interactions with them is always entertaining,
[Guest]: because he goes from thinking, okay, maybe it's a good idea, maybe we need to do this,
[Guest]: to then when they finally come to his office, which seems like a coup, because he's doesn't
[Guest]: really, he's not very fond of them, he scolds them saying that, you know, why do you have so
[Guest]: many fakes amidst you? Why can't you deal with these fake sadhus? Then when he goes and gives
[Guest]: a lecture to them on their home turf, again, he scolds them saying, okay, all this is well and
[Guest]: good that you're trying to help with development. But you know, we need to move forward, we need to
[Guest]: industrialize, we need to set aside superstition. But the biggest flaw that the Congress should
[Guest]: have seen away from a mile, but maybe we can see it because we have the benefit of hindsight,
[Guest]: is that these sadhus had their own agenda. They were much more concerned with getting rid of cow
[Guest]: slaughter, with all of these, what we would call today Hindutva causes than they were about
[Guest]: planning and about any economic policy. So for example, in 1966, this anti cow slaughter rally
[Guest]: gets out of hand, and these sadhus who are leading it with thresholds and swords, and knives,
[Guest]: they start attacking the police, the police have to tear gas them, several people die in Delhi,
[Guest]: ministers in the Congress governments, their houses are attacked, Central Delhi is vandalized
[Guest]: by these sadhus. And of course, at the end of the day, when like, you know, dozens of people dead,
[Guest]: more than 100 are injured, somebody has to take the fall for it. And who happens to be the Home
[Guest]: Minister of India at the time, Gulzar Lal Nanda. And so, Gulzar Lal Nanda's political career in
[Guest]: effect comes to an end because of this one organization that he had been the most consistent
[Guest]: patron of. And then I write about going forward, the Bharat Sadhu Samaj, it would not only blow
[Guest]: up in the face of the Congress, and this time in 1966, but in the future, the president of the
[Guest]: Bharat Sadhu Samaj, one Sant Tukdoji Maharaj, would become one of the vice presidents of the VHP.
[Guest]: In 1989, the VHP Pandal and the Bharat Sadhu Samaj Pandala, the Kumbh Mela basically became
[Guest]: identical. And from 1989 onwards, the Bharat Sadhu Samaj is basically endorsing Ram Janmabhoomi
[Guest]: and that Babri Masjid should fall. So in a sense, you have this creation of the Congress so much so
[Guest]: that its critics at the time were referring to the Bharat Sadhu Samaj as Congress sadhus, that these
[Guest]: Congress sadhus become, you know, sort of shock troops in the army of the BJP. It's a fabulously
[Amit Varma]: entertaining story, both Gulzar Lal Nanda and the Congress kind of hoist by their own petard. And if
[Amit Varma]: I remember in that 1966 march, they did, Karpatri Maharaj, one of their leaders also got injured in
[Amit Varma]: the eye or something, if I remember correctly. And Karpatri Maharaj, as my regular listeners
[Amit Varma]: might have heard in my episode with Akshay Mukul on the Gita Press, Karpatri also wrote this book
[Amit Varma]: called a book comparing Marxism and the Gita, and criticizing Marxism on the grounds of how it went
[Amit Varma]: against Hindu religion. And one of those criticisms was, and this is hilarious, one of those criticisms
[Amit Varma]: was that because communism abolishes private property, his argument was that every woman will
[Amit Varma]: become like a bucket from which any man can drink. So this is one of the iconic Hindutva leaders of
[Amit Varma]: the time, but he was, you know, and he got injured during this. So you know, when you talk about the
[Amit Varma]: schedule of the sadhus in the Kumbh Mela, it's a crazy schedule. And it makes it even funnier that
[Amit Varma]: Nehru actually referred to them as lazy rascals, because, you know, they seem misguided to me,
[Amit Varma]: certainly, but they don't seem all that lazy. And this whole chapter is such material for a comic
[Amit Varma]: novel, like you've quoted from a Rajendra Prasad speech to a whole bunch of these sadhus, where
[Amit Varma]: basically he tells them, quote, you need hardly be told that there is an intimate relationship
[Amit Varma]: between the world we live in and parlok, the world we strive for, it is not possible to achieve
[Amit Varma]: anything in the other world, without setting things in order to order in this world, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote, you know, therefore, talking of, you know, higher religious aims and saying that, hey, we need
[Amit Varma]: the planning commission to get us there, because we need to fix this world feast, I found that
[Amit Varma]: hilarious. What I also found hilarious was that, at one point, they were like some 75 lakh sadhus
[Amit Varma]: in India, according to a census, right. And they figured out that a lot of these sadhus were fake.
[Amit Varma]: So there was talk of a central executive committee that would quote grant membership only after a
[Amit Varma]: thorough review of the sadhus past beliefs and his activities from the time he first renounced the
[Amit Varma]: world, stop quote. And then later, you write about this registration bill, where you say,
[Amit Varma]: just months after the Bharat Sadhu Samaj was formed, the sadhus registration bill was tabled
[Amit Varma]: in Parliament in November 1956. It called for all of India's holy men and women to be registered and
[Amit Varma]: licensed or face the threat of going to jail for up to two years for impersonating real sadhus,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote, this is wild stuff. I mean, it's the stuff of satire, though I don't think anyone would
[Amit Varma]: dare to do satire on it in the current environment. But what was all this licensing stuff about? Was
[Amit Varma]: it to was it like, you know, elsewhere, there was a carrot, but was this also a stick to kind of tell
[Amit Varma]: the sadhus that listen, you know, whether you are called a sadhu or not depends on whether we give
[Amit Varma]: you a license to practice as a sadhu. So you better propagate the, you know, the five year plans or,
[Guest]: you know, was there an element of that to this? No, there was no stick. I mean, in some ways,
[Guest]: and it's why, for example, when there were some audits done later, they were, you know, some of
[Guest]: the audits was quite scathing about Bharat Sadhu Samaj saying that we're giving all this money,
[Guest]: and what are the results we're getting? They are just printing, using our money to print sort of
[Guest]: propaganda literature about, you know, to propagate Hinduism, which is all well and good if they did
[Guest]: on their own money, but why is the government of India paying for this? But the sadhu registration
[Guest]: bill was due to, like I said, a spate of newspaper reports and media reports about these sadhus,
[Guest]: which, to be fair, real sadhus did decry. They were saying that this is a problem, which is why
[Guest]: the Bharat Sadhu Samaj itself, without prompting, but out of fear of this Bharat Sadhu registration
[Guest]: bill, said that actually, yes, if we're going to get money from the government, and we want the
[Guest]: government to support us, and we don't want people to think that we're a bunch of quacks and, you
[Guest]: know, child kidnappers and all this sort of thing, we need to have, we need to give identity cards.
[Guest]: And that's what I found hilarious, the idea that this man has decided to renounce all life,
[Guest]: and, you know, maybe move to the Himalayas and to, you know, to live this life till he dies without
[Guest]: any worldly attachment, but has to carry an identity card, right? But the idea was that
[Guest]: without this identity card, how do you, and this identity card will only be given after, like,
[Guest]: vetting by the Bharat Sadhu Samaj, which consists of other sadhus, of if you're a real sadhu or not,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, or to be a fly on the wall for that conversation, right? Between one sadhu and
[Guest]: other, like, how do you determine, like, you know, what is the credentialing to prove that you've
[Amit Varma]: actually left the world? But I guess non-sadhus, like, you and I can't possibly come up with those
[Guest]: metrics, right? There's got to be a soul examination committee. That's true, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah,
[Guest]: in which they all share these, I suppose it has to be, like, peer review by sadhus, right?
[Guest]: And that's essentially what they're saying should be done, that instead of the government giving you
[Guest]: a registration, let sadhus decide who's a real sadhu and who's not. In the end, it didn't go
[Guest]: anywhere. But it was in this context that Nehru, for example, is made fun of in the popular press.
[Guest]: In numerous cartoons that I talk about, Nehru is pilloried by more liberal-leaning Indians saying,
[Guest]: you know, what the hell is our prime minister? Many cartoons showing him in basically a langot
[Guest]: and a loincloth, pretending to be a sadhu, and the caption is, for whose salvation? There's another
[Guest]: in which Nehru is walking on a bed of nails, holding the sort of the sign of the atom on one
[Guest]: hand, making fun of the fact that this is a person who's promoting atomic energy in India, but is
[Guest]: also indulging in this kind of obscurantism. There are a couple of, you know, funny cartoons about
[Guest]: how there's this, you know, this very typically Indian babu or bureaucrat sitting at his table
[Guest]: with the obligatory, you know, image of Gandhi behind him. And there's this person who's been
[Guest]: talking to him, like a very disheveled man, who looks like a sadhu who's been talking to him for
[Guest]: hours and hours, and he's been, you know, giving him chai after chai. And then he realizes after
[Guest]: many hours, it's just that, like, it's just some beggar who walked in. And that this babu is
[Guest]: wasted all the time, because he thought it's the bharat sadhu samaj that, you know, after all,
[Guest]: Nehru was patronizing. And there's another in which, you know, like a minister for finances
[Guest]: learning, you know, about deficit financing from a sadhu, because, of course, sadhus now seem to
[Guest]: be running the show. So there was all this sort of blowback to the Congress government about,
[Guest]: from the more sort of liberal sort of, you'd say, elite sections of the media about why India was
[Guest]: engaging in this kind of alliance with sadhus. But on the other hand, Nehru didn't put a stop
[Guest]: to it. And Nehru felt that maybe it is worthwhile, maybe this was perhaps the price to be paid for
[Guest]: to spread the message of the plants. And that in this way, he shows himself not to be really
[Guest]: anti-religion at all. He is sort of engaging with them, engaging with Indians on the terrain that
[Guest]: they would like, even though he's not very comfortable with it. He's not comfortable
[Guest]: with the idea. And you can imagine him sort of, you know, doing a big I told you so finger wag
[Amit Varma]: in 1966. But of course, he's dead by then. No, I mean, in this respect, perhaps I feel
[Amit Varma]: Nehru was a very lonely man, because a large part of his party was sympathetic towards a certain
[Amit Varma]: kind of benign Hindu nationalism. Like, it's worth pointing out that when the Babri Masjid,
[Amit Varma]: when the idol was installed in the Babri Masjid in the late 1940s, you know, it was a Congress
[Amit Varma]: government in charge in UP and the orders from Nehru were get the idol out of there. This is
[Amit Varma]: going to create trouble later. And the Home Minister of UP at the time was Lal Bahadur
[Amit Varma]: Shastri. The CM I think was Govind Ballabh Pant. Both of them did diddly squat because they didn't
[Amit Varma]: want to, you know, so if you so I mean, that's, you know, just a fascinating scenario that apart
[Amit Varma]: from Nehru, all the really tall leaders I had, you know, were far closer to, you know, were far
[Amit Varma]: closer to the Hindu sphere as it were. And it's interesting to think about what if Nehru hadn't
[Amit Varma]: existed and those leaders gradually, you know, whether it is Patel or Prasad or Shastri for a
[Amit Varma]: very brief while and he was by all accounts a humble man and a good Prime Minister, you know,
[Amit Varma]: if if they had survived, could we have, you know, prevented the rise of this more toxic and reactive
[Amit Varma]: Hindu Hindutva nationalism that we have before us today? But that's a separate question. You know,
[Amit Varma]: your book goes into far more detail than perhaps we have the time to and that's a good thing,
[Amit Varma]: because I'll just encourage all the listeners to buy it. You, you know, you describe in great
[Amit Varma]: detail the shifting intellectual currents and how through the 60s, the Planning Commission lost more
[Amit Varma]: and more relevance, you know, Murarji Desai as Finance Minister wasn't quite kosher with it. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Dhananjay Gadgil, who had always been, you know, against not a big votary of planning,
[Amit Varma]: actually took charge of the Planning Commission and all of that. So, all that story is fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And looking back, what would you say, like, at one level, you can look at that period and say,
[Amit Varma]: okay, we had an experiment with planning, it was really interesting. It's an interesting story.
[Amit Varma]: Bollywood was there, sadhus were there, and very interesting people, but it didn't really work,
[Amit Varma]: did it? But on the other hand, I would look at it also with the positive framework that look,
[Amit Varma]: what we got out of it was a certain statistical infrastructure, which gave us key data.
[Amit Varma]: It also gave us a certain scientific way of thinking about the world. Perhaps a mistake
[Amit Varma]: wasn't using it in a prescriptive way and saying we will use state power to do x and do y. But,
[Amit Varma]: you know, there is no doubt that it is essential to use data to use statistics in a descriptive
[Amit Varma]: way. And to say, this is what the world is like, this is what the world is like, how can we
[Amit Varma]: influence it with policy, and so on and so forth. And in fact, it was a lament to Pramit Bhattacharya
[Amit Varma]: that some of this statistical infrastructure is kind of withering away, and we are perhaps
[Amit Varma]: sort of losing it. So looking back on this, what is your sense of that entire period? Like,
[Amit Varma]: obviously, you've done what every historian should do that we now understand through this book,
[Amit Varma]: that period and those currents of history that much better. But apart from that, what are the
[Amit Varma]: resonances for the current time? And you know, what lessons can we take from it?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think the resonance is, is certainly, as you said, the sheer data capacity that India has
[Guest]: and has had, was seen in the 1950s onwards, as a real outlier amongst developing nation.
[Guest]: No other nation, according to statistics across the world had nearly the amount of data about its
[Guest]: citizenry, about employment, consumption, expenditure, all levels of granular detail as
[Guest]: India had, and at the kind of low cost that India had. And that, that attention to data,
[Guest]: the attention to building data infrastructures through the Central Statistical Organization,
[Guest]: through the National Sample Survey, through bringing computers to deal with the data,
[Guest]: that was a, I think, a real legacy and a good legacy of that period. And one that, as you say,
[Guest]: regardless of what policies it's used for, that data is important. And it's important in
[Guest]: socialist regimes, it's certainly important in market economies as well. And that is a legacy
[Guest]: that is in trouble today. As you said, Pramit Bhattacharya has written about, as a piece in
[Guest]: The Economist a couple of months ago said, India's statistical system is crumbling. As I think a
[Guest]: piece in the Business Standard a couple of years back said, it bemoaned what is happening to,
[Guest]: and I quote, the house that Mahalanobis built, right. And so I think that, and this is a
[Guest]: criticism that, to be clear, is made by economists from the left to right, right. It's not a
[Guest]: ideological position on this. You have economists like Abhijit Sen from JNU, to Thomas Piketty,
[Guest]: to Abhijit Sen at MIT, to Martin Revalian in Washington DC, like across the economic spectrum,
[Guest]: all of them bemoan the increasing opacity in India's statistical systems. We've seen from 2017
[Guest]: onwards that National Sample Survey data dealing with unemployment, because it showed a 40-year
[Guest]: high, was just not released and was leaked actually to the Business Standard. We've seen
[Guest]: that household expenditure data, household spending data from 2019 was, they just basically
[Guest]: decommissioned the entire survey because it showed that household spending was, again, at a record
[Guest]: low. This, I think, as I write in the book, good data is not always good politics, but that is to
[Guest]: the detriment of all Indian citizens. Because regardless of the party in power, we need to
[Guest]: have this data and it needs to be above politics because you cannot deal with poverty unless you
[Guest]: know, for example, how many poor people there are in the country. I mean, the government, whichever
[Guest]: government is in power, they can make whatever claims they want about poverty, but we need to
[Guest]: know at least to assess the claim, to even clap in acclamation for what they've done. We need to know
[Guest]: in a way that is transparent that, yes, it has gone from X to Y. But the lack of transparency,
[Guest]: I think, is what is really troubling. And I think that India has never been immune in its
[Guest]: institutions from political interference. We certainly had a lot of it, especially under
[Guest]: Indira Gandhi onwards. But I think that what is happening today is troubling because firstly,
[Guest]: we shouldn't return to that. But secondly, because it seems to be a part of a move that is
[Guest]: anti-intellectual, that there is a part of this populist moment is also an anti-intellectual
[Guest]: moment in which intellectuals are derided as being part of an elite and therefore immaterial.
[Guest]: And I think that that is not a good thing. It's not. Yes, of course, elites come from
[Guest]: certain sections of society. But the solution to that is to democratize education so that
[Guest]: elites are not associated with education and with high credentials, but that actually
[Guest]: an expert could be from any section of society. The solution is not to say that therefore
[Guest]: expertise itself is bad. And I would say that it is this vehement attitude against
[Guest]: intellectuals and expertise that leads to colossal failures such as demonetization,
[Guest]: something that no economist, again, from right to left has said was a good idea. And by the
[Guest]: government and RBI's own estimation has been a massive failure in that 99.8% of the black money
[Guest]: seems to be back in circulation today. You can say that the Nehru government got many economic
[Guest]: policies wrong. But that was wrong despite the experts at the time believing that it was right
[Guest]: at the time. So which is not expertise is not a guarantee of good outcomes, but it is a hedge
[Guest]: against it is one layer of safety that provides you some hedge against it. And so I think that
[Guest]: this sort of thing of making such a huge decision without consulting any qualified economist,
[Guest]: right, I mean, certainly don't consult historians, but consult economists about,
[Guest]: you know, taking away 80% of the money in circulation. That I think is a really
[Guest]: troubling sign for a country as large and for an economy as large as ours.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, absolutely agree. In fact, demonetization is like a litmus test for me. You know, it was
[Amit Varma]: the largest assault on property rights in human history. And if you called yourself an economist
[Amit Varma]: and supported it, you were either a bad economist or a bad human being, it had to be one of those
[Amit Varma]: two. There's no doubting the sort of importance of data. I mean, ideology doesn't matter to this
[Amit Varma]: data is data, you want to know the state of the world and couldn't agree more. I have a whole
[Amit Varma]: bunch of episodes. In fact, you know, I think I do two or three episodes every year where I just
[Amit Varma]: bemoan about this. So I'll link them from the show notes. And I love the point you made that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, even if experts sometimes got it wrong, don't deride expertise. And that's an important
[Amit Varma]: distinction to make. I do actually think many of our intellectuals and experts and especially
[Amit Varma]: elites led us down the wrong road. And therefore, a lot of the criticism of these elites is actually
[Amit Varma]: justified, even if you know, criticizing the Latins elite has now, you know, gone so far as
[Amit Varma]: to almost be caricature. But a lot of the criticism is justified, but only expertise again, can really
[Amit Varma]: get us out of this and not just, you know, but I think we should have better, better experts,
[Amit Varma]: yeah, better experts, more expertise. And it's, but I also, you know, earlier, we were talking
[Amit Varma]: about the state of a society, you know, in the context of the anti Muslim sentiment. And I think
[Amit Varma]: we were both in agreement that, listen, we have crossed a line in the last few years, it wasn't
[Amit Varma]: that we were always a united society, and it was hunky dory, but we have crossed a line. And
[Amit Varma]: similarly, with the attitude to data and institutions, I think we have crossed a line,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what has happened 2017 onwards, you know, previous governments had a much better
[Amit Varma]: attitude towards data transparency, and all of these discussions being there. But I think at some
[Amit Varma]: level, this government has decided and these things are always reversible. So one can hope for the
[Amit Varma]: best, but at some level, it seems as government has decided that it doesn't matter what the state
[Amit Varma]: of the world is, it only matters how well you control the narrative, you know, and, and I really
[Amit Varma]: hope that's, you know, not quite the case. So my last question before I let you go, is I,
[Amit Varma]: I traditionally these days, and my episodes by asking my guest to recommend books, films, music,
[Amit Varma]: things that mean a lot to them, not necessarily from your field, not necessarily from your domain
[Amit Varma]: of expertise, or what the book is about, but just stuff that strikes an emotional chord with you,
[Amit Varma]: you really love these, you know, you take them to a desert island, or they have meant a lot to you.
[Guest]: In terms of books, I'd recommend a book that I read last year, and it was part of my attempt
[Guest]: at getting back into fiction. And it is just such a rollicking read. It is a book called Circe by
[Guest]: Madeline Miller. She has two books, The Song of Achilles and Circe, both are based on ancient
[Guest]: sort of classic Greek classics, and based on the Odyssey and the story of Troy, etc. But you need
[Guest]: to have no background in any of these to read this. I have no background, I've not read the
[Guest]: Odyssey. But it is so Circe is a is the name of a of a female character in the Odyssey, who is a
[Guest]: very who's kind of a bit part player and a very small character in this in this epic by Homer.
[Guest]: But Madeline Miller, who is a wonderful writer, and a classicist who sort of trained in classics
[Guest]: herself, sort of breathes life into this one small character, and, in a sense, rewrites the
[Guest]: Odyssey from the perspective of this very marginal character. And, and, and this entire epic that is
[Guest]: about glorious battles and men and men killing each other, men, looks so different from the
[Guest]: viewpoint of this one lesser God, as she puts it, I think, and it's in from it's from its very
[Guest]: opening line, it's just a beautifully written book. It's not one of those books that is, you
[Guest]: know, literary, and therefore a plodding read. It's a great fun read one that I sort of stayed
[Guest]: up at night trying to read. When the power went out, I was sort of, you know, by the fireplace
[Guest]: in the sort of cold in South Bend in Indiana trying to sort of read it. It is, yeah, I mean,
[Guest]: it's from the perspective of, as she puts it, in one of the first lines, from the least of the
[Guest]: lesser goddesses, and Circe is the name of that person. And so that and the Song of Achilles,
[Guest]: which is about the relationship between Achilles, the sort of hero of Troy, of the Trojan War,
[Guest]: and his relationship with Patroclus, who is often portrayed as this kind of platonic relationship,
[Guest]: but many scholars today and most historians today believe that actually there was a sort of
[Guest]: homosexual relationship between Patroclus and Achilles. And again, it's just beautifully
[Guest]: written, just great story. It sort of reminded me of these sort of the sort of comics and the
[Guest]: stories I used to read about the Ramayana, the Mahabharata, right, all the action and people
[Guest]: with superheroes, with superhero powers, etc. So those are two books of fiction I really enjoyed.
[Guest]: And another one is by Richard Osman. It's called The Thursday Murder Club, which I also enjoyed.
[Guest]: I read it on my flight from the US to India. It's about four people in their 70s in an old age home,
[Guest]: and they decide that they're going to form an amateur, you know, detective club,
[Guest]: and they try to solve a murder. But it's full of humor. I mean, I read it for, I mean,
[Guest]: more than the murder mystery, which is really good. It's just funny. I mean, you sort of pause
[Guest]: and smile several times, because it's all about, it's really utterly charming. It's about these
[Guest]: four old people. And so it's all about, you know, the fact that, well, you know, they can't give up
[Guest]: their game of bridge in the afternoon. So they have to take a break from all the sleuthing.
[Guest]: They have to attend their sort of French class in the morning, then they go and have their lunch.
[Guest]: So it's all about sort of aging and old people, but sort of is not doesn't look at upon them with
[Guest]: sympathy or look upon them with pity. But they really they're full of life, they are full of
[Guest]: intellectual vigor, this they're very curious, and they're super smart. And they all come from
[Guest]: different backgrounds. And it's so it's about life in this old age home. And oh, by the way,
[Guest]: they're solving a murder, which they do successfully in the end. Well, it sounds great. Have you seen
[Guest]: the show only murders in the building? No, but my mother in law has and she recommends it very
[Amit Varma]: highly. So I intend to watch it. Yeah, I just thought of that when you spoke of the Thursday
[Amit Varma]: Murder Club, the only two of the three people are kind of older. Well, Nikhil, you know, thank you
[Amit Varma]: so much for being so patient. I know for a historian, it may not be as difficult as for
[Amit Varma]: other people. But thanks so much for the patience. I had a great time. Thank you, Amit. This was
[Amit Varma]: really fun. If you enjoyed listening to this episode, head on over to your nearest bookstore
[Amit Varma]: online or offline and pick up Nikhil Menon's wonderful book, Planning Democracy. Do check
[Amit Varma]: out the show notes, enter rabbit holes at will. Nikhil, smart man, productive man is not on social
[Amit Varma]: media. But you can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, AMI TV, ARMA. You can browse past episodes
[Amit Varma]: of the scene in the unseen at seen unseen.in. Thank you for listening. Did you enjoy this
[Amit Varma]: episode of the scene in the unseen? If so, would you like to support the production of the show?
[Amit Varma]: You can go over to seen unseen.in slash support and contribute any amount you like
[Amit Varma]: to keep this podcast alive and kicking. Thank you.